THE FUTURE OF
INVESTMENT
MANAGEMENT

Ronald N. Kahn

THE FUTURE OF
INVESTMENT
MANAGEMENT

Ronald N. Kahn

Statement of Purpose
The CFA Institute Research Foundation is a
not-for-profit organization established to promote
the development and dissemination of relevant
research for investment practitioners worldwide.
Neither the Research Foundation, CFA Institute, nor the publication’s editorial staff is responsible for facts and opinions presented in this publication.
This publication reflects the views of the author(s) and does not represent
the official views of the CFA Institute Research Foundation.

The CFA Institute Research Foundation and the Research Foundation logo are trademarks
owned by the CFA Institute Research Foundation. CFA®, Chartered Financial Analyst®,
AIMR-PPS®, and GIPS® are just a few of the trademarks owned by CFA Institute. To view
a list of CFA Institute trademarks and the Guide for the Use of CFA Institute Marks, please
visit our website at www.cfainstitute.org.
© 2018 The CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted,
in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise,
without the prior written permission of the copyright holder.
This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in regard to
the subject matter covered. It is sold with the understanding that the publisher is not engaged
in rendering legal, accounting, or other professional service. If legal advice or other expert
assistance is required, the services of a competent professional should be sought.
Cover photo credit: blackred / iStock / Getty Images Plus
ISBN 978-1-944960-56-8

Biography
Ronald N. Kahn is a managing director and global head of systematic
equity research at BlackRock, where he has overall responsibility for the
research underpinning the Systematic Active Equity products. His service
with the firm dates back to 1998, including his years with Barclays Global
Investors, which merged with BlackRock in 2009. Prior to that, he worked
as director of research at Barra. An expert on portfolio management, risk
modeling, and quantitative investing, Dr. Kahn has published numerous articles on investment management, and he coauthored, with Richard
Grinold, Active Portfolio Management: Quantitative Theory and Applications.
The two of them won the 2013 James R. Vertin award, presented periodically by CFA Institute to recognize individuals who have produced a body
of research notable for its relevance and enduring value to investment professionals. He has won the Bernstein Fabozzi/Jacobs Levy award for best article
in the Journal of Portfolio Management. Dr. Kahn is on the editorial advisory
boards of the Financial Analysts Journal, the Journal of Portfolio Management,
and the Journal of Investment Consulting. He teaches “International Equity
and Currency Markets” in the Master of Financial Engineering Program at
the University of California, Berkeley. Dr. Kahn received an AB in Physics,
summa cum laude, from Princeton University and a PhD in Physics from
Harvard University. He was a postdoctoral fellow in physics at the University
of California, Berkeley.

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved. 

iii

Dedication
To another arc of history—from my parents, Ernest and Gloria Kahn, to my
children, Max, Eli, and Katie. The future belongs to them.
26 May 2018

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved. 

v

Contents
Foreword.................................................................................................
Richard C. Grinold
Preface. . ...................................................................................................
Acknowledgements................................................................................
1. Introduction. . .......................................................................................
2. The Early Roots of Investment Management. . .....................................
Pre-Modern History: The Early Roots of Investment
Management..............................................................................
The Dutch Origins of Investment Management.............................
The Evolution of Investment Management in Britain
and the United States.................................................................
The Evolution of Investment Data..................................................
Bibliography...................................................................................
3. The Modern History of Investment Management...............................
The Origins of Systematic Investing. . ..............................................
The Birth of Modern Portfolio Theory.. ...........................................
Active Management Strikes Back. . ..................................................
The Evolution of Investing..............................................................
Appendix........................................................................................
Bibliography...................................................................................
4. Seven Insights into Active Management.............................................
Insight 1. Active Management Is a Zero-Sum Game.......................
Insight 2. Information Ratios Determine Added Value...................
Insight 3. Allocate Risk Budget in Proportion
to Information Ratios..................................................................
Insight 4. Alphas Must Control for Skill, Volatility,
and Expectations. . ......................................................................
Insight 5. The Fundamental Law of Active Management:
Information Ratios Depend on Skill, Diversification,
and Efficiency.............................................................................
Insight 6. Data Mining Is Easy.. ........................................................
Insight 7. Constraints and Costs Have a Surprisingly
Large Impact.. .............................................................................
Summary........................................................................................
Technical Appendix........................................................................
Bibliography...................................................................................
© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved. 

ix
xi
xiii
1
4
4
7
9
10
11
12
12
15
25
33
33
34
38
39
41
45
46
50
59
65
70
70
72
vii

5. Seven Trends in Investment Management..........................................
Trend 1. Active to Passive................................................................
Trend 2. Increased Competition. . ....................................................
Trend 3. Changing Market Environments.......................................
Trend 4. Big Data. . ...........................................................................
Trend 5. Smart Beta. . .......................................................................
Trend 6. Investing Beyond Returns.................................................
Trend 7. Fee Compression...............................................................
Bibliography...................................................................................
6. The Future of Investment Management..............................................
Index Funds....................................................................................
Smart Beta/Factor Funds................................................................
Pure Alpha Funds. . ..........................................................................
Investing Beyond Returns...............................................................
Fees. . ...............................................................................................
Conclusion......................................................................................
Bibliography...................................................................................

74
74
78
81
83
86
95
100
104
107
107
109
111
112
114
114
115

This publication qualifies for 4 CE credits under the guidelines of the CFA Institute Continuing Education Program.

Foreword
When an industry changes, it is essential to distinguish between core truths
that will persist and traditional practice that may not endure. The institutional investment industry has been changing at a sedate pace since dawn of
modern financial theory in the 1960s. Most of this change has occurred in
the institutional investor sphere. However, the rate of change, amplified by
technology, is starting to pick up and is increasingly causing a long-needed
change in retail investing. Individual investors are becoming cost conscious
and accepting of passive investment vehicles and other low-cost, highly diversified exchange-traded funds. It is gratifying to see the behemoths of retail
investing battling it out in advertisements, each claiming the lowest prices.
Ron Kahn is perfectly positioned to be your guide through this transition.
He has been an investment industry professional for more than 30 years. He
is adept at theory and practice and, as a lecturer in finance at the University
of California, Berkeley, Haas School of Business, he is familiar with the latest
academic research. There is no better guide through this era of institutional
transformation. This book is not the first time Ron has studied a transition.
He earned his PhD at Harvard University with a thesis on the Big Bang, the
prime transition. He worked with Luis Alvarez at Berkeley on another cataclysmic transition, nailing down the link between an asteroid impact and the
extinction of the dinosaurs.
I had a boyhood friend who could take his India ink pen and, with five or
six lines on paper, produce a recognizable image. How did he do it? Five lines,
yet you knew who it was and what he was doing. Ron writes in this fashion.
He can take a complicated subject and, in a couple of brief paragraphs, extract
its essence. Ron’s skill is in evidence in Chapters 2 and 3, which provide the
historical backdrop to the current era.
Ron abides by the time-tested rule of seven as an organizing principle.
We have seven seals, seven wonders of the world, seven deadly sins—even
seven dwarfs and seven faculty rules at Monty Python’s fictional University of
Woolloomooloo. Why not seven insights into active management and seven
trends in investment management? Ron uses the rule of seven to great effect.
The seventh insight into active management, regarding cost and constraints, is particularly relevant. Active managers strive to have good forecasts, but they are in something very close to a zero-sum game. Perfection
is not expected or possible. In dealing with costs and constraints, there is no
excuse for sloppy implementation. Poor estimation of transaction costs and
slipshod trading are a substantial drain. Any constraint on a portfolio that is
© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved. 

ix

The Future of Investment Management

not mandated should be viewed as an admission that the drivers of the portfolio, the forecasts, and the portfolio construction process are poorly designed.
Of the seven trends in active management, the fourth—the big data
theme—seems to be the most revolutionary. Can you afford to ignore it, and
if you are a small shop, can you afford it at all? Ron does an excellent job
laying out the scope of the big data challenge. One can only be sure that technological momentum will take us from the age of big data to the age of bigger
data, so don’t be left behind.
If you are studying for an MBA, preparing for your CFA Program exam,
or a veteran investor who needs to prepare for the mid 21st century, then you
will find this book an invaluable guide. It will provide a clear explanation of
these crucial topics and point the way for anyone who wants to delve deeper.
Richard C. Grinold

x

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved.

Preface
This book grew out of two efforts that started in 2015. First, my group at
BlackRock—the Systematic Active Equity team—held an investor symposium for our clients in May of that year. Raffaele Savi and Jeff Shen, the
co-heads of the group, encouraged me to present a talk on the future of
investment management. The winds of change had grown sufficiently strong
that a talk on the general topic seemed appropriate. Soon after the symposium, I was delighted to receive an invitation to present the 2016 Thys Visser
Commemorative Lecture Series at Stellenbosch University in South Africa.
I chose to speak on the same topic, and the opportunity to present three
hours of lectures allowed me to expand and more fully develop the material.
The first version of this book, therefore, saw the light of day in South Africa.
With those initial efforts behind me, I was quite receptive to discussions with
Larry Siegel of the CFA Institute Research Foundation that led directly to
this book.
Although the future of investment management is a big topic, a central
arc traces through its history, and its trajectory predicts what will come in the
next 5–10 years. Investment management is becoming increasingly systematic.
Systems, analysis, structure, and understanding—built on increasingly available data—are replacing gut feelings and whims.
I participated in some of these developments over the past 30-plus years.
When I entered finance, almost all investing was active investing. Index
funds were relatively small. They had only begun generating profits for Wells
Fargo Investment Advisors in 1984, a full 13 years after the firm developed
and launched the first index fund product. Quantitative investing was in its
infancy. Exchange-traded funds, so popular today, didn’t appear until 1993.
Investment data at that time were mainly fundamental and highly structured—for example, accounting statements and regulatory filings. Price and
volume data were often analyzed at a monthly frequency, especially to understand risk and general trends.
Technology has advanced rapidly since 1987. At that time, one gigabyte
of memory cost about $10,000. In 2018, it costs less than three cents. Popular
3.5-inch floppy disks stored 2.88 megabytes of data; several of them would
be required to store one digital photo taken today. The internet didn’t exist in
1987, though e-mail would become widely popular by the mid- to late 1990s.
Today we have the internet, big data, and machine learning.

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved. 

xi

The Future of Investment Management

My career has focused on quantitative approaches to investing—building
quantitative models to predict risk, return, and cost—and optimizing investment portfolios on the basis of those forecasts. Quantitative investing is a
specific form of systematic investing. I do not argue here that all investing
should become quantitative investing, but I do argue that investing is becoming increasingly systematic.

xii

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved.

Acknowledgements
Many thanks to BlackRock and its senior leaders, Larry Fink and Rob Kapito,
for supporting this effort and for deftly steering the firm toward the future.
Many thanks also to Raffaele Savi and Jeff Shen, co-heads of the Systematic
Active Equity team, and to Mark Wiseman, head of active equities, for their
support and forward thinking.
Richard Grinold provided most of my early education in finance and
investing and has heavily influenced my thinking on the future of investment management, as well as most other topics in investing. He has been a
fantastic mentor, colleague, and co-author. His hand is quite visible in this
book, most obviously in Chapter 4, on insights into active management. The
mistakes and misunderstandings, though, belong solely to me.
Over the course of this work, I’ve benefited from the insight, advice,
and help of many other people. Within the Systematic Active Equity team,
Jeff and Raffaele provided the initial suggestion for a talk on this topic and,
through many discussions, influenced my thinking about it. Brad Betts provided the vision for how big data and machine learning could affect investing
and taught me much of what I know about those fields. Mike Lemmon coauthored several articles with me on smart beta/factor investing that provide
key elements of the narrative. Mike Bishopp added early thoughts on active
return decompositions and later thoughts on fees. Gerry Garvey provided
insights into the intellectual developments of the field. Debbie McCoy suggested many improvements to the section on investing beyond returns. And
Nikita Artizov and Sheng Xie helped with some detailed data analysis.
Beyond the Systematic Active Equity team, Mark Paltrowitz provided
useful insights into various reasons why active management could succeed.
Ed Fishwick shared his thoughts on many topics, including the drivers of
success in fundamental active management. Ed’s numerous invitations to
present at the annual London Quant Group seminar provided opportunities
to test out some of these ideas. Hubert De Jesus helped with his clear analysis
of the changing trading environment. I benefited from a number of suggestions from BlackRock participants at presentations of this material. Although
I have received help and suggestions from many people at BlackRock, this
book represents my own views and not necessarily those of BlackRock.
Outside of BlackRock, Marty Leibowitz provided some early input to
my thoughts on the future of investment management. Frank Jones, as usual,
provided encouraging comments and suggestions. Matt Lyberg, the discussant for my presentation at the Journal of Investment Management conference
© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved. 

xiii

The Future of Investment Management

in March 2017, provided useful feedback. Harry Marmer suggested many
ideas during a lunch at the Q-Group. Will Goetzmann, whose book Money
Changes Everything was a key source for the early history of investment management, and Larry Siegel both pointed me to papers by Geert Rouwenhorst
on the Dutch investment trusts of the late 1700s.
I want to thank several people at Stellenbosch University: my host,
Professor Christo Boshoff, for his gracious hospitality during my stay;
Professor Stan du Plessis, dean of the Faculty of Economic and Management
Sciences, for his support; and Dr. Mike Lamont, for suggesting me as a Thys
Visser lecturer. I greatly benefited from the opportunity and from participant
feedback. I also have many fond memories of the series of dinners Christo
and Stan organized with different groups of academic and business leaders in
Stellenbosch.
Larry Siegel encouraged me early on to write this book and then provided
deft and insightful editing as I finished it. Thanks!
Finally, I want to thank my wife, Julia, for her enthusiastic proofreading
and overall support in life.

xiv

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction
Investment management is in flux, arguably more than it has been in a long
time. Active management is under pressure, with investors switching from
active to index funds. New “smart beta” products offer low-cost exposures to
many active ideas. Exchange-traded funds are proliferating. Markets and regulations have changed significantly over the past 10–20 years, and data and
technology—which are increasingly important for investment management—
are evolving even more rapidly.
In the midst of this change, what can we say about the future of investment management? What ideas will influence its evolution? What types of
products will flourish over the next 5–10 years?
I use a long perspective to address these questions by exploring how
investment management has grown and evolved to reach its current state,
including key ideas and trends that have influenced its history. I analyze the
modern intellectual history of investment management—roughly, the set of
ideas, developed over the past 100 years, that have influenced investment
management up to now. For additional context and to understand the full arc
of history, I briefly discuss the early roots of the field. As I discuss this history,
I review the various ideas and insights that ultimately coalesce into a coherent
understanding of investing, in spite of its uncertain nature.
Over time, our understanding of risk has evolved from a general aversion
to losing money to a precisely defined statistic we can measure and forecast.
Our understanding of expected returns has evolved as the necessary data
have become more available, as our understanding of fundamental value has
developed, and as we have slowly come to understand the connection between
return and risk and the relevance of human behavior to both. Data and technology have advanced in parallel to facilitate implementing better approaches.
Our systems of understanding this intrinsically uncertain activity of
investing continue to expand, influencing the investment products we see
today and those we expect to see in the future. It is as hard to imagine index
funds and exchange-traded funds (ETFs) dominating the investment markets of the Netherlands in the 1700s as it is to imagine their absence in the
global investment markets of 2018.
With an understanding of the ideas underlying investment management
today, including several insights into active management, I discuss the many
trends currently roiling the field. These trends, applied to the current state of
investment management, suggest a specific view of the future.
© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved. 

1

The Future of Investment Management

The following is a roadmap for the rest of the book. Chapter 2, on the
early roots of investment management, briefly explains what investment
management is, what its required elements are, and when those elements
first appeared. Investment management may go back to ancient times, but its
clear historical record begins in the Netherlands in the late 1700s. Those early
records show that investors already appreciated diversification and thought
about value investing.
Chapter 3, on the modern history of investment management, traces the
evolution of ideas and practices that have influenced the field up through
today. The first efforts at developing systematic approaches began almost a
century ago, partly in response to periods of wild speculation and losses, such
as the market crash of 1929. Our understanding of investment value developed around this time, and our modern understanding of risk and portfolio
construction began in the 1950s. Chapter 3 also traces the development of
ideas underlying index funds—initially conceived in academia in the 1960s—
and, in response, the eventual development of systematic approaches to active
management.
Chapter 4, on seven insights into active management, describes key concepts required to understand efforts to outperform. This chapter begins with
the “arithmetic of active management,” the idea that active management is
worse than a zero-sum game—that the average active manager will underperform. It then shows that the information ratio—the amount of outperformance per unit of risk—determines an active manager’s ability to add value for
investors. It also determines how investors should allocate risk and capital to
different active products. The chapter discusses the fundamental law of active
management, which breaks down the information ratio into constituent parts:
skill, diversification, and efficiency. This relationship can help active managers develop new strategies and provide some guidance to investors looking
to choose active managers. Other insights cover the process of forecasting
returns, challenges to testing new investment ideas, and understanding how
portfolio constraints affect the efficiency of implementing investment ideas.
Chapter 5, on seven trends in investment management, turns the spotlight on current directions that will affect the future of the field. These trajectories include the shift in assets from active to passive investing, the increase
in competition among active managers, the changing market environment,
the emergence of big data, the development of smart beta, the increased interest in what I call investing beyond returns—that is, investing for non-return
objectives, such as environmental, social, and governance goals, as well as to
earn returns—and, finally, fee compression.
2

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction

Chapter 6, on the future of investment management, applies these trends
to the current state of investment management—theory and practice—to
forecast how the field will evolve over the next 5–10 years.
To add an optimistic spin on the current level of disruption in investment management, which is unsettling for many people in the field, I argue
that this disruption can create great opportunities. The shifting boundaries
between active and passive and dramatic changes in technology augur well
for new types of products and new sources of information to help managers
outperform. Today may not be a great time to be a 50-year-old investment
manager, but as I often tell students and colleagues studying for the CFA®
Program exams, it is a great time to be a quantitatively oriented 28-year-old
entering the field.

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved. 

3

2. The Early Roots of Investment
Management
History is just one damn thing after another.
—Arnold J. Toynbee1

Analyzing the future of investment management requires context. How
can we tell where we’re going if we don’t know where we’ve been? I argue that
the history of investment management follows a long arc, and it bends toward
increasingly systematic approaches.
This is not ultimately a history book, however, and I mainly focus on
investment management from the perspective of the 21st century, where
specially trained and often chartered professionals manage other people’s
money. These professionals invest funds across publicly traded stocks, bonds,
managed funds, real estate, alternatives, and other opportunities on the basis
of readily available information. And they manage investments for specific
purposes—risk control (e.g., diversification), income, or growth; or funding
retirement, education, or a home purchase. An individual owning his own
business may be engaged in a worthwhile endeavor, but it isn’t investment
management by this definition. The profession began only when it became
possible to at least somewhat easily invest in multiple opportunities.
Before I delve into the modern history of investment management, however, it’s interesting to briefly see how far back we can trace the profession,
including its key components: a broad range of available investments and the
data to inform investment decisions. That is the focus of this chapter on the
early roots of investment management.

Pre-Modern History: The Early Roots of Investment
Management
According to William Goetzmann (2016), a variety of investment opportunities existed as far back as roughly 4,000 years ago. Ancient Mesopotamia
had a functioning secondary loan market in personal promissory notes as well
as opportunities for equity-like investments in maritime expeditions.2 Thus,
we know that early investors could have diversified. However, we don’t know
the availability of useful information about these investments back then, and
Toynbee (1957, p. 267).
These included limited liability and broad participation. Even ordinary (non-wealthy) citizens invested, according to Goetzmann.
1
2

4

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved.

2. The Early Roots of Investment Management

we don’t know whether professionals managed such investments for other
people back then. Later, Athenian bankers may have acted as intermediaries
in investing for clients, but if they did, we don’t know much about the principles involved.
There is evidence from Rome in the first two centuries BCE that Roman
publican societies (societas publicanorum) “anticipated the modern corporation and, in particular, the use of fungible shares with limited liability.”3 In
the centuries when Rome was expanding but before it had its own extensive bureaucracy, these publican societies were government contractors and
handled many government tasks, from building to tax collection. Shares in
these societies were liquid and traded—with time-varying share prices—near
the Temple of Castor in the Roman Forum. These societies effectively existed
as separate entities, legally distinct from just a collection of owners. Thus,
equity-like investment opportunities existed during part of the Roman era.
As for the component parts of investment management, government
bonds appeared in Italy in the 12th century and full-scale bond markets
developed a century later.
Financial historians have long studied when public companies first
appeared. Public companies feature large numbers of minority owners who
can freely buy and sell stakes without affecting the company. The company
acts as an independent entity, represented by managers rather than a collection of owners, and it is the entity that becomes the bearer of obligations.
These characteristics describe what are known as joint stock companies. The
other important characteristic of public companies is limited liability. As we
have seen, the publican societies in Rome had the characteristics of public
companies, though they disappeared during the last centuries of the Roman
era. Public companies reappeared in a few instances in Europe as early as the
late 1300s.4 And with the establishment of the Dutch East India Company
in 1602—a joint stock limited liability company established by the Dutch
government—public companies were here to stay and play a significant role
in the world economy. Shares of the Dutch East India Company began trading on the Amsterdam Stock Exchange, which is generally viewed as the
Malmendier (2005, p. 32).
Goetzmann (2016), elaborating on Ibbotson and Brinson (1993), reported that the first publicly traded equity in medieval Europe was that of the Bazacle water mill near Toulouse,
France. The shares traded continuously from 1372 until the company was nationalized by
Électricité de France in 1946. Ibbotson and Brinson (1993, p. 149) noted that the mill itself
dated to the 800s, but “by the 1100s ownership had been divided into shares, which were
sometimes traded.” Goetzmann (2016) reported that in 1372, it reorganized as a public
company.
3
4

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved. 

5

The Future of Investment Management

first stock market—though, as we have seen, something like a stock market
existed in the Roman Forum. The Dutch East India Company offered shares
broadly to anyone who could afford them, and they traded actively on this
secondary market.
Interestingly, the so-called Glorious Revolution in England in 1688
brought the concept of joint stock limited liability companies from the
Netherlands to England, where it flourished. In the Glorious Revolution, the
Dutchman William III, Prince of Orange, in concert with English members of Parliament, invaded England, deposed the Catholic King James II,
and became King of England. His wife, Mary, daughter of James II, became
Queen of England.
According to Goetzmann (2016), in 1695, joint stock companies represented 1.3% of British national wealth, but that amount rose to 13% by 1720
during the South Sea Bubble.
The South Sea Company, founded in 1711, was a British joint stock
company originated for two somewhat orthogonal purposes. First, as the
name implied, it had the British monopoly on trade with South America,
which was potentially quite lucrative. Second, it represented a feat of financial engineering designed to address Britain’s huge national debt. Owners
of illiquid British debt could swap those holdings for shares in the South
Sea Company, which paid a dividend yield less than the debt coupon, but
the shares were liquid and provided a stake in the South American trade.
Meanwhile, the British government consolidated much of its debt into a loan
from the South Sea Corporation at a lower interest rate. The government
officials who developed this plan became directors and significant shareholders of the company.
Although many people interested in investing or European history have
heard of the South Sea Company and its stock bubble, few people are aware
that a significant part of the South American trade consisted of Britain supplying African slaves to the Spanish colonies in South America. The South
Sea Company owned the contractual right (asiento) that Spain provided to
Britain for that slave trade.
In 1719, the South Sea Company was engaged in another exchange of
shares for British debt, which would be more favorable for the company at
higher share prices (they would, therefore, exchange fewer shares for the
debt). The company spread false rumors of the value of South American
trade, leading to an enormous run-up in its price. This scheme came crashing down in 1720, leading to widespread ruin among shareholders, many of
whom purchased shares on margin. As this turmoil played out, Parliament
passed the Bubble Act of 1720, greatly restricting the creation and trading
6

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved.

2. The Early Roots of Investment Management

of joint stock companies. It required, among other things, a royal charter or
act of Parliament to create a joint stock company. This situation didn’t change
until the mid-1800s.5
Another component of investment management is the availability and
use of information required to make thoughtful investments. Stock price lists
appeared in 1691, in John Houghton’s Collection for Improvement of Husbandry
and Trade,6 and by 1694 the publication regularly listed 52 traded companies. For the largest of them, Houghton provided free weekly price quotes.
Subscribers had to pay for price quotes for the smaller firms.
Overall, we can trace components of investment management back quite
far, and somewhat recognizable investment management may also have
existed during certain periods in that era. But the most concrete and clear
evidence of early investment management occurred in the Netherlands starting in 1774, more than 240 years ago.

The Dutch Origins of Investment Management
The first broadly available investment trust—where investors could purchase
shares in a diversified portfolio of investments—appeared in the Netherlands
in 1774.7 It was effectively the world’s first mutual fund.
In July 1774, Abraham van Ketwich invited investors to consider
Eendragt Maakt Magt, the first closed-end investment trust. The name
means “unity creates strength.” It’s both a motto of the Dutch Republic and
a succinct argument for diversification. Evidently, the history of providing
investment opportunities with clever names goes back to at least that time.
The investment management goal of Eendragt Maakt Magt was solely diversification. The trust invested in a portfolio of foreign government bonds from
Austria, Denmark, Germany, Spain, Sweden, and Russia as well as plantation mortgages from the West Indies. This investment vehicle would appeal
to smaller investors who lacked the ability to diversify across so many different bonds. The bonds in the portfolio had face values of 1,000 guilders each,
yet investors could buy shares in Eendragt Maakt Magt for only 500 guilders.
The fund prospectus specified details regarding initial portfolio formation, including the goal of equal proportions of investments across many
different issues in each of several categories. These details significantly limited any flexibility to adjust the portfolio weights or holdings, adding to the
Because of the Bubble Act, much of the industrial revolution (roughly 1760 to 1820–1840)
was financed not by joint stock companies but by partnerships of wealthy individuals without
limited liability.
6
Goetzmann (2016, p. 327).
7
Rouwenhorst (2016).
5

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved. 

7

The Future of Investment Management

evidence that Eendragt Maakt Magt’s raison d’être was diversification, not
active management.
The risk control extended beyond diversification. The prospectus also
specified that van Ketwich would store the physical securities in his office, in
an iron chest with three differently working locks to which the trust commissioners and the notary public kept the separate keys.8
Eendragt Maakt Magt promised to pay an annual dividend of 4%, with
adjustments over time based on the actual income produced. The plan was
to dissolve the trust after 25 years and distribute any remaining proceeds
to investors. Oddly, given its goal of diversification and risk mitigation,
Eendragt Maakt Magt also included a lottery component that used some of
the investment proceeds to—by lot—retire some shares at a premium and
increase dividends to some shares. According to Rouwenhorst, this lotterylike feature, which included the small probability of a significantly higher
return, appeared to be designed to attract small investors.
Why did the first mutual fund appear in the Netherlands in 1774?
Circumstantial evidence points to a motivation for financial innovation that
plays out many times after this: a response to a financial crisis. In this case,
it was the credit crisis of 1772. Credit had expanded in the years before then,
leading to increased speculation. But in mid-1772, a partner at a British bank
fled to France to avoid repaying debts, initiating a credit collapse. Many
British firms went bankrupt, and Dutch banks suffered significant losses as
well. Van Ketwich would have experienced this crisis up close and seen the
need for lower-risk investment opportunities.
Interestingly, the British East India Company struggled to repay debts
to the Bank of England during this period, leading it to try to raise money
by selling its vast inventory of tea to the 13 British colonies in America.
Parliament passed the Tea Act to facilitate this effort, giving the British East
India Company a monopoly over the tea trade in the Colonies. This situation
led to protests, including the Boston Tea Party in 1773.
After the launch of Eendragt Maakt Magt, more than 30 other funds
started up in the Netherlands at the end of the 1700s. One interesting example
is Concordia Res Parvae Crescunt,9 the second fund launched by van Ketwich
and the third fund overall. Designed to provide diversification, this fund also
allowed flexibility in managing the portfolio. According to Rouwenhorst, the
prospectus declared that the fund would invest in “solid securities and those
Rouwenhorst (2016, p. 223).
The name comes from the Latin origin of Eendragt Maakt Magt, according to Rouwenhorst
(2016, p. 217).
8
9

8

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved.

2. The Early Roots of Investment Management

that, based on a decline in their price, … could be purchased below their
intrinsic values,” making this possibly the world’s first value fund.10
Eendragt Maakt Magt redeemed its last shares in 1824, 50 years after it
started. Concordia Res Parvae Crescunt redeemed its last shares in 1894, a
full 114 years after launch. Both funds started with a plan to dissolve after a
period of time, yet Concordia Res Parvae Crescunt ended up becoming one
of the longest-lived funds of all time.

The Evolution of Investment Management
in Britain and the United States
Following the Dutch origins of investment management, a somewhat parallel set of developments occurred in Britain and the United States during the
1800s.
First was a set of advances that revitalized public investing in company
stocks. As we have seen, there was great enthusiasm for equity investing in
England in the early 1700s, up until the South Sea Bubble. At that time in
England, significant numbers of joint stock companies with limited liability
existed. Broad public acceptance of equity investing required the existence of
many joint stock companies with limited liability, and the Bubble Act of 1720
essentially eliminated them.
Revitalization of equity investing began with the Joint Stock Companies
Act of 1844, 124 years after the Bubble Act, which established procedures for
anyone to start a joint stock company (i.e., to incorporate). Prior to this act
of Parliament, the Bubble Act allowed the creation of a joint stock company
only by either royal charter or an act of legislation. Hence, many businesses
operated as unincorporated associations with potentially large numbers of
associated members. This situation could be quite unwieldy. For instance, any
litigation needed to be done in the name of all the members, requiring all of
their sign-offs.
The Limited Liability Act of 1855 then allowed limited liability for joint
stock companies established by the general public (i.e., under the Joint Stock
Companies Act of 1844). So, by 1855, companies could easily incorporate and
set up limited liability structures. This made equity investment management
possible, by allowing the creation of large numbers of joint stock, limited
liability companies.
In 1868, the Foreign and Colonial Government Trust became the first
British mutual fund. According to its prospectus, its goal was to provide
“the investor of moderate means the same advantages as the large capitalist
10

Rouwenhorst (2016, p. 217).

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved. 

9

The Future of Investment Management

in diminishing the risk of investing … by spreading the investment over a
number of different stocks” (stocks meaning what we would call bonds).11 It
changed its name to the Foreign and Colonial Investment Trust in 1891
and first invested in equities in 1925. It still exists today—the world’s oldest
investment trust. It is a closed-end fund trading on both the London Stock
Exchange and the New Zealand Stock Exchange.
After the launch of this first British investment trust, several additional
trusts were launched in England over the subsequent decade. Investment
trusts began in the United States in the 1890s. The first US open-end mutual
fund, the Massachusetts Investors Trust, began in 1924. It survived an 83%
drop during the 1929–32 crash and still exists today.

The Evolution of Investment Data
As previously noted, stock price lists appeared in 1691, in John Houghton’s
oddly named Collection for Improvement of Husbandry and Trade. John Castaing’s
Course of the Exchange began publishing daily stock prices in 1693 and was the
main source of stock price data into the 1800s.
The listings of stock prices dropped off dramatically, along with the trading of stocks, after the South Sea Bubble of 1720. But by the 1800s, a number
of data providers covered the rapidly growing number of potential investments. The Economist magazine appeared in 1843. It offered a monthly list of
stock and bond prices that was more than 50 pages long.
Paul Reuter started Reuters in 1851, relying on the telegraph and more
than 200 carrier pigeons to transmit information quickly. Henry Poor
started Poor’s Publishing, an investment information service, in 1860. In
1941, it combined with Standard Statistics Bureau (founded in 1906) to form
Standard & Poor’s. Dow Jones began in 1882, and the Financial Times started
up in 1888.
These companies mainly provided price data in those early days. Available
fundamental information about companies was limited, inconsistent, and
poorly regulated. In the United States prior to the 1930s, individual states
handled regulations, leading to inconsistencies across the country. The
situation improved in England in 1908 with passage of the Companies
(Consolidation) Act, which required disclosures in annual reports. But in the
United States, many companies kept sales figures secret, even into the 1920s.
Interestingly, in 1909, Henry Lowenfeld wrote Investment: An Exact
Science, wherein he proposed his theory of the “Geographic Distribution of
Capital”—the idea that an investment portfolio should be diversified across
11

Bullock (1959, p. 2).

10

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved.

2. The Early Roots of Investment Management

different economic zones around the world. This wasn’t exactly a new idea; it
was the concept underlying Eendragt Maagt Makt in 1774. But Lowenfeld
correctly understood that different economic zones faced different risks
and that diversification could reduce risk without affecting expected return
(“income” in his analysis). And economic zone of origin as well as industry
were fundamental variables widely available even in the absence of other fundamental data. The definition and analysis of diversification would become
much more precise less than 50 years later.

Bibliography
Bullock, Hugh. 1959. The Story of Investment Companies. New York: Columbia
University Press.
Goetzmann, William N. 2016. Money Changes Everything: How Finance
Made Civilization Possible. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Ibbotson, Roger G., and Gary P. Brinson. 1993. Global Investing: The
Professional’s Guide to the World Capital Markets. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Lowenfeld, Henry. 1909. Investment: An Exact Science. London: Financial
Review of Reviews.
Malmendier, Ulrike. 2005. “Roman Shares.” In The Origins of Value: The
Financial Innovations That Created Modern Capital Markets, edited by
W. Goetzmann and G. Rouwenhorst. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Rouwenhorst, Geert K. 2016. “Structural Finance and the Origins of Mutual
Funds in 18th Century Netherlands.” In Financial Market History: Reflections
on the Past for Investors Today, edited by David Chambers and Elroy Dimson.
Charlottesville, VA: CFA Institute Research Foundation.
Rubinstein, Mark. 2006. A History of the Theory of Investments. Hoboken, NJ:
John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Toynbee, Arnold J. 1957. “Law and Freedom in History.” In A Study of
History, Vol. 2. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved. 

11

3. The Modern History of Investment
Management
History is written by the survivors.
—Modern proverb

Chapter 2 traced the roots of investment management back to the earliest availability of multiple investment opportunities and the origins of
investment data. It focused more on where activities began than on the ideas
that informed how people invested. In many cases, we don’t know how they
invested, though the understanding of the value of diversification goes back
quite far. In this chapter, on the modern history of investment management,
the ideas informing investors play a central role. Peter Bernstein (1992) covered some of this terrain in his book Capital Ideas. Bernstein conveyed these
ideas without mathematics, but I’ve included equations where I think they
add clarity. By the early 1900s, many of the required elements of investment
management existed at some level, including a wide variety of available liquid
bond and stock investments and some information to help inform investors.
Henry Lowenfeld (1909) had even proposed his “exact science” approach to
investing by diversifying across geographic regions. But it took the stock market crash of 1929 to inspire a last set of developments that characterize what I
call the beginning of the modern era.

The Origins of Systematic Investing
In response to the stock market crash, new rules and regulations required the
disclosure of financial statements and the independent audit of those statements by public accountants. In the United States, these new regulations were
contained in the Securities Act of 1933 and the Securities Exchange Act of
1934. The first governed new issues, and the second governed secondary trading of issues. Following these changes, investors gained access to reliable,
material information about possible investments. This access finally facilitated
the first modern systematic approaches to investing.
Benjamin Graham, David Dodd, and Security Analysis. If the first
step on the path to systematic investing was a rudimentary understanding
of diversification, then the second step may have been the publication of
Graham and Dodd’s Security Analysis in 1934.12 Though the book discussed
12

Graham and Dodd (2009).

12

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved.

3. The Modern History of Investment Management

bonds as well as stocks, Mark Rubinstein (2006, p. 66) called this “perhaps
the most famous book written on the stock market,” and it has long been the
Bible of security analysis and value investing.
Written against the backdrop of the wild speculation that characterized
the run-up to the crash of 1929, Security Analysis made several important
contributions that remain valid. First, it argued for the critical importance
of thorough and rigorous analysis—hard work—before making any investment decision. Although this idea seems obvious, it was not common prior
to Graham and Dodd’s work; in fact, there wasn’t much of a framework
for analyzing securities. Graham and Dodd provided the necessary framework by presenting a systematic approach to analyzing securities—especially
dividends, earnings, and the balance sheet. Peter Bernstein told a story
about Ben Graham analyzing Consolidated Edison, a hot stock in 1928:
“Most people believed, on the basis of the truncated and incomplete reporting permitted by regulators in those days, that the dividends being paid by
the company represented only a small portion of the actual earnings of its
operating subsidiaries.”13 Graham actually went to City Hall, researched
the utility company records there, and discovered that Con Ed’s subsidiaries
generated negligible earnings. “When Graham published his findings, one
of the stockbrokers he was working with took him aside and said, ‘Young
man, it is people like you who are going to destroy this business.’ ”14 Security
Analysis encouraged investors to “take very much the same attitude in valuing
shares of stock as in valuing his own business,”15 a view often repeated by Ben
Graham’s most famous and successful disciple, Warren Buffett. Graham and
Dodd also noted that in the 30 or so years before publication of their book,
there “was a considerable advance in the frequency and adequacy of corporate
statements, thus supplying the public and the securities analyst with a wealth
of statistical data.”16
The book distinguished investing from speculation. According to
Graham and Dodd, “an investment operation is one which, upon thorough
analysis, promises safety of principal and a satisfactory return. Operations not
meeting these requirements are speculative.”17 Basically, Graham and Dodd
tried to distinguish their approach to investing from the gambling—buying
stocks on rumor and because they were going up—that characterized the runup to October 1929. Finally, the book introduced the concept of a margin of
Bernstein (1992, p. 157).
Ibid.
15
Graham and Dodd (2009, p. 409)
16
Graham and Dodd (2009, p. 349).
17
Graham and Dodd (2009, p. 106).
13
14

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved. 

13

The Future of Investment Management

safety. As Bruce Greenwald noted, “The purchase of securities should then be
made only at prices far enough below the intrinsic value to provide a margin
of safety that would offer appropriate protection against this ‘indistinctness’
in the calculated intrinsic value.”18 Here was the Graham and Dodd focus
on value. They understood that we cannot estimate intrinsic value precisely,
and so they advocated investing in securities whose prices are so low relative
to intrinsic value that margins of safety exist to counteract that uncertainty.
Much of Security Analysis described systematically how to analyze various
types of securities: bonds, preferred stock, convertibles, and common stock.
The book then focused in on understanding and then predicting earnings and
the balance sheet.
Although Graham and Dodd’s book represented a breakthrough in
investment management—and it is still widely read today—it provided a very
useful set of rules rather than a theory of investing. It doesn’t fully consider
diversification or the role of risk in investment value. Ben Graham later commented that investors should own “a minimum of ten different issues and
a maximum of about thirty.”19 Finally, Security Analysis generally avoids any
sophisticated mathematical analysis. That soon arrived, however, in 1938 with
John Burr Williams’s The Theory of Investment Value.
John Burr Williams and The Theory of Investment Value. The Theory
of Investment Value, which, like Security Analysis, appeared against the backdrop of the crash of 1929 and the subsequent Great Depression, is a remarkable book from today’s perspective. It truly is a theory of investment value,
and it is one we still use today. John Burr Williams is widely acknowledged
for identifying investment value as the discounted value of future dividends.
The value of a company must be its future payments to investors, discounted
back to today. With that framework, the book analyzes in detail many possible paths of future dividends.
With that core principle, John Burr Williams (1938) provided at least two
other gems of analysis. His “Law of the Conservation of Investment Value”
showed that value is independent of the capital structure of the firm (i.e.,
how the firm is financed between equity and bond offerings). Modigliani and
Miller formalized this idea in 1958, and it partly contributed to their winning
Nobel Prizes. (They provided a more rigorous proof of this idea, but it also
seems that The Theory of Investment Value was not widely known or appreciated back then.) Williams also developed algebraic formulas for investment
value in many particular cases, including constant dividend growth, almost
18
19

Bruce Greenwald in Graham and Dodd (2009, p. 536).
Graham (1973, p. 114).

14

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved.

3. The Modern History of Investment Management

two decades ahead of Gordon’s 1956 model. The book provided several key
observations, whether or not recognized. Beyond these specific contributions, John Burr Williams also advanced the use of sophisticated mathematics in understanding investments. As he noted in the preface to the book,
“The mathematics is not to be considered as a drawback to the analysis. Quite
the contrary! The truth is that the mathematical method is a new tool of
great power, whose use promises to lead to notable advances in investment
analysis.”20 That has certainly proven true. Williams’s path to publication was
rather interesting as it turns out. The book was his PhD dissertation in economics at Harvard University, and he submitted it for publication prior to
receiving his degree, which caused some difficulty for him within the department. Some publishers refused to consider the book because of its extensive
mathematics, and Harvard University Press published it only after Williams
agreed to cover part of the printing cost.
We can trace the origins of systematic investing mainly back to the
United States in the 1930s. After the stock market crash, we saw new regulations requiring financial disclosures and the publication of Security Analysis
and The Theory of Investment Value. These events set the stage for modern portfolio theory.

The Birth of Modern Portfolio Theory
Modern portfolio theory began with Harry Markowitz mathematically defining risk. This section on the birth of modern portfolio theory begins with him
and follows through to the launch of the first index fund.
Harry Markowitz and Portfolio Selection. According to Harry
Markowitz (1990), “the basic concepts of portfolio theory came to me
one afternoon in the library while reading John Burr Williams’ Theory of
Investment Value.” First published in 1952, Markowitz’s “Portfolio Selection”
mathematically defined risk as the standard deviation of return and proposed
that portfolio selection should follow from the optimal trade-off between
expected return and risk. Before Markowitz, investors understood risk as
roughly related to the probability of loss. By providing a precise mathematical definition of risk—and one that accorded well with investor intuition—
Markowitz dramatically opened investment management to mathematical
analysis. Furthermore, by defining investment management as the trade-off
between portfolio expected return and risk, he placed the portfolio center
stage. The standard deviation of a portfolio return depends on the standard
20

Williams (1938, p. ix).

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved. 

15

The Future of Investment Management

deviations of the returns to all the assets in the portfolio, as well as the correlations of returns to all those assets. Markowitz proposed that all investors should care about in the end is the behavior of the portfolio, not the
individual assets in it. Let’s look at this in a bit more mathematical detail.21
If a portfolio P invests a fraction hP (n) in asset n, sn represents the standard
deviation of asset n’s return (which we also call asset n’s volatility), and rnm is
the correlation between the returns to assets n and m, then
N

σ P2 = ∑ hP2 (n ) ⋅ σ n2 + ∑ hP (n ) ⋅ hP (m ) ⋅ σ n ⋅ σ m ⋅ρnm .
n =1

n ≠m

(3.1)

That is, the variance of the portfolio’s return, σ P2 , equals the weighted
sum of the variances of the individual asset returns plus a weighted sum of
the covariances of each asset with every other asset. (Variance is the square of
standard deviation, s.)
We can also write this more simply in vector notation as
σ P2 = hTP ⋅ V ⋅ h P .

(3.2)

Equations 3.1 and 3.2 say exactly the same thing. Equation 3.2 is more
compact, 22 representing the portfolio as
 hP (1) 


hP (2) 

hP =
  


 hP ( N ) 

(3.3)

and the covariance matrix, V, as
 σ2 … σ 
1
1N


V =    ,
 σ N 1  σ 2N 



(3.4)

For simplicity, I use the notation from Grinold and Kahn (2000).
We represent vectors and matrices in bold (non-italicized) type and scalar numbers in standard (not bold) type. (Vectors are matrices with one dimension equal to 1.) You can see this,
for example, in Equation 3.2. On the right-hand side of the equal sign, we multiply together
a vector times a matrix times a vector. The result is a scalar number—the portfolio variance.
21

22

16

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved.

3. The Modern History of Investment Management

where
σ ij = σ i ⋅ σ j ⋅ρij .

(3.5)

Thus, Equations 3.1 and 3.2 tell us that the risk, or standard deviation,
of the portfolio is lower than the weighted sum of the standard deviations
of the portfolio components, where the correlation matrix of the component
returns determines the amount by which it’s lower. All other things being
equal, lower correlations mean lower overall portfolio risk.
If all the assets are uncorrelated and have the same volatility and we
invest equal amounts in every asset, then
1
N
σ n = σ (each asset n has identical standard deviation)

hP (n ) =

σP ⇒

σ
.
N

(3.6)

For example, if we equally invest in 20 uncorrelated assets, each with a
volatility of 35%, our portfolio will have a volatility of about 8%.
With the same assumptions above except that the correlations aren’t zero
but, rather, every asset has the same correlation r with every other asset, then
in the limit of a large number of assets N in the portfolio,
σ P ⇒ σ ⋅ ρ.

(3.7)

Using the same example as before but now assuming the assets are all
50% correlated with each other (i.e., r = 0.5), the portfolio volatility is about
25%, much higher than when we assumed no correlations.
In general, assets vary in the standard deviations of their returns, the correlations between assets can vary, and investors do not invest equal fractions
in every asset. Equation 3.1 (or, equivalently, Equation 3.2) provides the general result.
The importance of asset correlations deserves special attention here. One
reason that Graham and Dodd, as well as Williams, may have ignored risk is
the idea that investors can reduce risk without limit by diversifying across a
number of assets. That’s basically the result in Equation 3.6. The more assets,
the lower the risk. But the Markowitz framework and our example show that
that isn’t quite right. Asset correlations limit the extent to which diversification can reduce risk. If every asset is correlated with every other asset, we are
© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved. 

17

The Future of Investment Management
Exhibit 3.1. The Markowitz Efficient Frontier
Portfolio Expected Excess Return (%)
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
–2
–4

0

5

10

15

20

Portfolio Risk (standard deviation, %)

25

30

closer to the situation captured by Equation 3.7. We later see that detailed
factor models of risk can provide useful insights into the structure of investment markets.
After defining risk, Markowitz (1952) proposed that investors care about
both expected return and risk. We can take every possible feasible fully
invested portfolio, 23 calculate its expected return and risk, and represent it as
a point on a graph of expected return against risk. He showed that there is a
set of efficient portfolios on that graph. They are the portfolios with the lowest risk for every level of expected return (or equivalently the portfolios with
the highest expected return for all portfolios with the same risk). Exhibit 3.1
illustrates this concept. The curve traces the minimum standard deviation
portfolio for each expected return.
Investors should choose from among those efficient portfolios. Different
investors might choose different efficient portfolios on the basis of their own
risk preferences. An investor with a higher tolerance for risk will choose a
higher-risk (and higher-expected-return) portfolio.
This says something remarkable. If we can forecast returns and risks,
investment management is then a mathematical optimization problem.
23

We represent a portfolio as a set of holdings (e.g., 10% in A, 5% in B, 0% in C, and so on).

18

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved.

3. The Modern History of Investment Management

Mathematical optimization identifies the efficient frontier. Then, on the
basis of risk tolerance, investors can choose the best portfolio for themselves
among those efficient portfolios. For the first time, we have a clearly specified framework for portfolio management. As Peter Bernstein (2007, p. xii)
noted, “Before Markowitz’s 1952 essay on portfolio selection, there was no
genuine theory of portfolio construction—there were just rules of thumb and
folklore.”
It is important to remember that Markowitz proposed this idea at the
beginning of the computer age. At the time, it was basically a purely academic
idea. In 1952, the only computers capable of performing such an analysis
existed at US government labs focused on nuclear weapon design. It would
take further developments in both theory and computing for Markowitz to
have a practical impact on investing. By the time he won the Nobel Prize in
1990, his approach had had a significant impact indeed.
Looking back at the early 1950s, we already have a rigorous, if somewhat
abstract, risk–return framework. We have a systematic approach to security analysis, which could, in principle, lead to better estimates of expected
returns and the construction of portfolios with higher expected returns per
unit of risk taken. However, no investors were fully utilizing this approach
to investment management. The necessary computing power wasn’t readily
available, and few investors had sufficient training in the required mathematics and econometrics. The next steps in this evolution of modern portfolio
theory came from William F. Sharpe, a student of Harry Markowitz.
William Sharpe and the Capital Asset Pricing Model. Sharpe (1963)
first developed a simplified risk model to facilitate Markowitz portfolio construction. There were at least two practical challenges to implementing the
Markowitz approach. First, to estimate the standard deviation for a portfolio
of N assets required estimates of not only N standard deviations (one for each
N ⋅ ( N − 1)
asset) but also
correlations (for every asset with every other asset).
2
So, for three assets A, B, and C, we need three correlations: the correlations
of A with B, A with C, and B with C. As N increases, the number of required
parameters grows quickly. Second, as N increases, the required computing
time also grows rapidly.
Sharpe introduced a simplified model of asset returns, separating each
return into two components. To be exact, Sharpe focused on excess returns
(rn), the returns above the risk-free return (e.g., the return to investing in a
US Treasury bill). The excess return to asset n consists of a systematic piece
(driven by rmkt, the excess return to the market) and a residual piece, qn, independent of the market:
© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved. 

19

The Future of Investment Management

rn = βn ⋅ rmkt + θn .

(3.8)

The beta coefficient, bn, measures asset n’s exposure to the market. If we,
for example, plotted monthly excess returns to asset n versus monthly excess
market returns over a five-year period, we could estimate bn as the slope of
the line that best fits those points.
Now we can always do this: Break every return into two such components, one correlated with the market and one independent of the market.
But Sharpe made the assumption that all residual returns are uncorrelated.
By construction, the residual returns for each asset are uncorrelated with the
market. Sharpe’s assumption was that they were also uncorrelated with each
other. For different assets n and m,
Corr{θn , θm } = 0.

(3.9)

So, any two different assets are correlated because, and only because, both
are exposed to the market. Mathematically,
Corr{rn , rm } =

2
βn ⋅βm ⋅ σ mkt
.
σn ⋅ σm

(3.10)

N ⋅ ( N + 1)
risk parameters (standard deviations
2
and correlations), we now need to estimate only 2N + 1 parameters—the {bn},
the {sn}, and smkt. We have reduced the number of required parameters once
we have four or more assets, and we have reduced the number of required
parameters significantly once we have many more than four assets. For 500
assets, we need estimate only 1,001 parameters instead of 125,250 parameters. This simplified model also significantly reduces computing time.
In his 1963 article, Sharpe stated that solving a 100-asset problem on
an IBM 7090 computer required 33 minutes, but his simplified risk model
reduced that to 30 seconds. In what might be even more surprising to today’s
readers, he further stated that the IBM 7090 he was using could handle only
249 assets at most, whereas using the simplified risk model allowed him to
handle 2,000 assets.
Sharpe’s simplified risk model had significant benefits in reducing the
required number of estimated parameters and computer speed. Unfortunately,
it didn’t predict risk especially well. The assumption that asset residual returns
are uncorrelated breaks down too often. It says, for example, that ExxonMobil
and Royal Dutch Shell, two large oil companies, are correlated only because
Instead of estimating

20

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved.

3. The Modern History of Investment Management

both are exposed to the overall market, ignoring the many oil-related characteristics and large-stock characteristics they also share. I return later to risk
models that provide greater structure, simplicity, and accuracy. But for now,
let’s look at Sharpe’s next effort, seemingly inspired in part by his simplified
model (though the two make different assumptions).
In 1964, Sharpe (and separately, Lintner 1965, Mossin 1966, and Treynor
1961) proposed an equilibrium model of expected returns and pricing: the
capital asset pricing model, or CAPM. If investors share the same views of
expected returns and risks (a rather heroic assumption) but differ in their
aversion to risk, they will agree on the Markowitz efficient frontier, which
depends only on expected return and risk.
Sharpe then showed, using the mathematics associated with optimization, that expected excess returns for any portfolio (or asset) are simply related
to the expected excess return to Portfolio Q   , the efficient portfolio with the
highest ratio of expected return to risk. Exhibit 3.2 shows Q   graphically.
What Sharpe said mathematically is
E{r p } = β P ⋅ E{rQ }.

Exhibit 3.2.

(3.11)

Portfolio Q and the Markowitz Efficient Frontier

Portfolio Expected Excess Return (%)
12
10
Portfolio Q

8
6
4
2
0
–2
–4

0

5

10

15

20

25

Portfolio Risk (standard deviation, %)

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved. 

30

35

21

The Future of Investment Management

It turns out that Equation 3.11 is always true, even if we aren’t in equilibrium and investors do not agree on expected returns and risk. But in that
case, every investor will have her own Portfolio Q. Sharpe’s assumption that
all investors agree on expected returns and risks means that they also all agree
on Portfolio Q. Sharpe just needed a small step from there to assert that if all
investors agree on Q and all are in equilibrium, then Q must be the market
portfolio—that is, the capitalization-weighted combination of all the securities in the market. (If it weren’t, then investors would trade away from the
market toward Q   , so they wouldn’t be in equilibrium.) Therefore
E{r p } = β P ⋅ E{rmkt }.

(3.12)

These b coefficients are the same ones from the simplified risk model,
though the two models make different assumptions. Sharpe’s simplified risk
model assumed residual returns are uncorrelated but didn’t assume equilibrium or that all investors agree on expected returns and risks. The CAPM
assumes equilibrium and that investors agree on expected returns and risks
but does not assume that residual returns are uncorrelated. The b coefficients
play roles in each model, though, and it is tempting to assume that Sharpe’s
simplified risk model somehow provided an inspiration on his journey to (co-)
discover the CAPM.
The CAPM is the first theory of asset pricing with risk playing a central role. It also established the market as the benchmark for investors, laying
the initial groundwork for index funds. If the market is efficient and has the
highest ratio of expected return to risk, then investors should want to own it.
Of course, the CAPM relied on some heroic assumptions, and its definition of “the market” is actually the portfolio of everything: global stocks,
bonds, real estate, commodities, collectibles, and so on—not something as
narrow as, for example, the S&P 500 Index.
Still, this was a significant advance in our understanding of investing,
and Sharpe shared the 1990 Nobel Prize in Economic Sciences with Harry
Markowitz and Merton Miller.
Eugene Fama and the Efficient Market Hypothesis. If the CAPM
first turned the market itself into an interesting portfolio for investors, Eugene
Fama amplified the interest with his efficient market hypothesis (EMH),
described in his review paper of 1970. By efficient market, he meant that
prices reflect available information; thus, investors can only beat the market
in expectation by taking more risk. (After the fact, their having taken more
risk means that they might not beat the market; that is what “risk” means.)
22

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved.

3. The Modern History of Investment Management

Sharpe and others used equilibrium arguments to promote the market
portfolio. Fama looked empirically at stock return distributions to argue
that investors can beat the market only by taking more risk. He also argued
that the activities of many different investors, each with their own views of
expected returns, can lead to an efficient market.
In the details, Fama posited the by now well-known three forms of
market efficiency: weak, semi-strong, and strong. In weak efficiency, market prices fully reflect historical price information. In semi-strong efficiency,
they reflect all publicly available information. And in strong efficiency, prices
reflect all relevant information, public and private.
These arguments, backed by Fama’s empirical evidence and his sway over
academic finance as a leading professor at the University of Chicago, added to
the view of the market portfolio as the optimal portfolio. The efficient market
hypothesis became the basic assumption active managers needed to overcome.
And as sometimes happens in academia, the efficient market became such
enforced dogma that it strongly discouraged any work on market inefficiency
by finance and economics professors for the next 30 years or more, to the
detriment of the ivory tower.
Victor Niederhoffer, in his 1997 autobiography The Education of a
Speculator, illustrated this point with an anecdote from his time as a graduate student in the business school at the University of Chicago in the 1960s.
He overhears four other grad students talking with two professors about
research into how trading volume might influence stock prices. One of the
grad students is concerned about the possibility of finding an effect that is
inconsistent with the EMH. One of the professors reassures the student that
they will deal with that in the unlikely event it occurs. As Niederhoffer (1997,
p. 270) put it, “Here were six scientists openly hoping to find no departures
from ignorance.” Niederhoffer then says to them, “I sure am glad you are all
keeping an open mind about your research.”
This happened in spite of our inability to ever prove the efficient market
hypothesis (in any of its forms). We can’t prove such a hypothesis; we can only
accumulate evidence in its favor. We might be able to use counterexamples to
disprove a hypothesis, but even doing that is challenging in this case. We have
seen the EMH fall short in the face of price bubbles or rapid price movements.
When the S&P 500 fell by more than 20% on Monday, 19 October 1987, it
was hard to argue that prices fully reflected available information on both
Friday, 16 October 1987, and Monday, 19 October 1987. Could our entire
information set have shifted by so much over a relatively uneventful weekend?
It’s highly unlikely. Yet, in spite of such counterexamples, the EMH seems to
accurately capture the fact that beating the market is quite difficult. It has had
© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved. 

23

The Future of Investment Management

a major impact on our understanding of markets, and Eugene Fama shared
the Nobel Prize in Economic Sciences in 2013.
The First Index Fund. The final significant milestone in this “birth of
modern portfolio theory” era occurred in 1971, when Wells Fargo Investment
Advisors launched the first index fund, for the Samsonite Luggage Pension
Plan.24 Finally there was an actual investment product inspired by the academic work of Markowitz, Sharpe, Fama, and many others. Before Sharpe
and Fama, in particular, the idea of just buying every stock in the market
would have seemed a ludicrous proposition. Shouldn’t careful security analysis inform investment decisions? Why settle for average? But starting in 1971,
money started flowing into index funds, and those funds have kept growing
ever since.
Given the enormous success of indexing—which we know with the perspective of 45+ years after that first launch—it’s interesting to look at that
first fund and its launch in more detail.
The first index fund was not designed to track the S&P 500. In fact, it
invested in an equal-weighted portfolio of the roughly 1,500 stocks traded on
the New York Stock Exchange. Managing this fund required a considerable
technology infrastructure investment—who at that time managed portfolios
with more than a thousand stocks? Furthermore, Wells Fargo quickly learned
that an equal-weighted portfolio generates a lot of turnover. Every day (or
every chosen rebalance period), the stocks move out of alignment and require
rebalancing back to equal weights. This doesn’t happen with capitalizationweighted indexes, such as the S&P 500. And in fact, the S&P 500 Index
fund was “Version 2” for Samsonite.
As to the launch of the fund, Ancell (2012) and Jahnke (1990) provide
a wonderful history of those early days. Here, it’s worth asking two questions: Why Wells Fargo? Why Samsonite? Wells Fargo was not an investment management powerhouse at that time and was headquartered in San
Francisco—not New York City or Boston, where many large investment management firms have headquarters. Wells Fargo wanted to grow its investment
management business, but it had several challenges—its size and location, in
particular. The firm knew it would have trouble besting the East Coast–based
market leaders at their own game. When these modern portfolio theory ideas
developed in academia, Wells Fargo saw them as a way to enter the field.
It’s not surprising, then, that a second-tier player in investment management
launched the first index fund.
The Vanguard 500 Index fund launched after the Samsonite fund. It was the first retail
index fund.
24

24

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved.

3. The Modern History of Investment Management

As it turned out, Wells Fargo’s bet on index funds and modern portfolio theory was ultimately quite successful. That initial fund—after many
years, several corporate actions, and the launches of many more index funds
globally—became a large part of BlackRock, the world’s largest investment
manager, with over $6 trillion in assets in 2018. But it was a bet that required
remarkable patience. Wells Fargo didn’t make money on index funds for the
first 13 years.
The Samsonite Luggage pension fund became the first index fund investor by way of a lucky accident. Keith Shwayder, whose family had founded
and owned Samsonite Luggage, was an assistant professor of accounting
at the University of Chicago. Thus, he was exposed to the CAPM and the
EMH, and he had a connection to a pension fund.
So where did things stand in 1971? The Markowitz framework had been
around for almost 20 years, providing a general theory of portfolio selection.
It didn’t say anything about market efficiency. The following developments—
the CAPM and the EMH—implied that active management was futile. This
view came to dominate academic finance. With the increasing power of computers, these academic theories moved from abstractions to investible products. And the market crises of the early 1970s—including the oil embargo
and the decline of the Nifty Fifty stocks—increased investor interest in new
approaches to investing.

Active Management Strikes Back
The early 1970s saw an increasing disconnect between these academic theories, which favored indexing, and the actual practice of investing, which
consisted almost entirely of active management at that time. Could active
management utilize some of the advances in modern portfolio theory while
retaining a belief that successful active management was possible?
Jack Treynor, Fischer Black, and Using Security Analysis to
Improve Portfolio Selection. The first effort along these lines came from
Jack Treynor and Fischer Black in 1973 when they published “How to Use
Security Analysis to Improve Portfolio Selection.” Treynor had been working
on CAPM ideas around the same time as Sharpe, and Black was about to
publish his paper with Myron Scholes on option pricing.25 Treynor and Black
(1973) tried to reconcile the advances in portfolio theory with the long history
of security analysis. Even if most assets are efficiently priced, what should
an investor do with information about some that may be inefficiently priced?
25

Black and Scholes (1973).

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved. 

25

The Future of Investment Management

They wrote, “We make the assumption that security analysis, properly used,
can improve portfolio performance. This paper is directed toward finding a
way to make the best possible use of the information provided by security
analysts.”26
Their mathematical analysis showed that investors should own the market portfolio plus an active (long–short) portfolio:
hP (n ) = hmkt (n ) + hPA (n ).

(3.13)

We can think of that active long–short portfolio as overweights and
underweights relative to the market.27 If security analysis provides little value,
the investor will mainly hold the market portfolio. If security analysis does
provide value, the investor will adjust the balance between the market and
long–short portfolios accordingly. Using Sharpe’s simplified model, Treynor
and Black showed that the active position for each asset n, hPA (n), was proportional to the expected residual return (i.e., expected return beyond that
implied by the CAPM) for that stock, α n , divided by the variance of that
residual return, ω n2:
α n = E{θn }

ω n = StDev{θn }
hPA (n ) 

(3.14)

αn
.
ω n2

Note that in Equation 3.14, we use w to denote residual risk—the standard deviation of the residual return, q. We use s to denote total risk—the
standard deviation of the excess return, r.
Treynor and Black (1973) were not enthusiastically received by finance
academics. They presented their paper at the CRSP (Center for Research
in Security Prices) seminar at the University of Chicago in November 1967,
and as Treynor recalled, “the talk did not go well.”28 They were presenting to
academics who believed markets were efficient and active management was
futile.
The contribution of Treynor and Black (1973) was to combine the CAPM
with current practice into the overall Markowitz framework. It proposed
the modern view that active management is difficult but not impossible and
Treynor and Black (1973, p. 67).
Note that Treynor and Black didn’t require the portfolio to be long only.
28
Mehrling (2005, p. 67).
26
27

26

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved.

3. The Modern History of Investment Management

that the Markowitz framework provides a systematic approach for active
management.
Both Treynor and Black could have won Nobel Prizes, but neither did,
for different reasons. Treynor had independently developed the ideas in the
CAPM, which he circulated but never published. Black would certainly have
won the Nobel Prize in Economic Sciences in 1997 with Myron Scholes and
Robert Merton for their work on option pricing, but he died in 1995.
Fischer Black and Myron Scholes: From Theory to a New Financial
Product. A second effort in support of active management came in 1974,
when Fischer Black and Myron Scholes presented “From Theory to a New
Financial Product” at the American Finance Association annual meeting.
These two had published their option pricing paper (Black and Scholes 1973)
the year before. In their 1974 paper, they described their efforts consulting
for Wells Fargo Investment Advisors on a new product based on the latest
financial theories. Although Black and Scholes (1974, p. 399) started with
indexing, they did discuss some active management possibilities:
The modern theory of finance suggests that most investors should put part
or all of their money into a “market portfolio” mixed with borrowing or
lending. Empirical evidence generally supports the theory, but there are
some unanswered questions about the composition of the best market portfolio, and the apparent attractiveness of low risk stocks relative to high risk
stocks, and about the ways of minimizing transaction costs. Attempts to
create a fund based on these principles and to make it available to a large
number of investors have uncovered some important problems. Legal costs
due to government regulation, the costs of managing a fund, and especially
the costs of selling it are all much higher than one might expect. Despite
these problems, efforts to create such funds seem destined for eventual
success.

They identified several interesting issues:
•• How to choose the appropriate index
•• The surprising attractiveness of low-volatility stocks, a potential active
strategy29
•• Real-world issues previously unexplored by academics: legal costs, government regulations, and costs of managing and selling a product
The first published evidence for this effect—that low-beta stocks exhibit positive alphas and
high-beta stocks exhibit negative alphas—was from Black, Jensen, and Scholes (1972). We
now know this as the low-volatility factor used in today’s smart beta products.
29

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved. 

27

The Future of Investment Management

Black and Scholes (1974) made a few important contributions. Leading
academics were applying the latest financial theory to develop an investable product, and their product mixed active and index components. As the
authors noted, their product idea was marred by the difficulty they had in
constructing and selling it. This paper went a step beyond Treynor and Black
(1973) in providing rigorous empirical analysis leading to a proposed blend of
attractive investment opportunities.
Barr Rosenberg and Factor Models of Portfolio Risk. The next development improved our understanding of risk by generalizing Sharpe’s market
model to more-versatile factor models. Sharpe identified one factor driving
correlations between assets—the market. That model succeeded at simplifying calculations and made Markowitz optimization tractable for computers of
that era, but it didn’t accurately forecast risk. Although the market factor does
explain a significant fraction of correlation, it misses important elements, as
noted previously.
Barr Rosenberg (1974), a University of California, Berkeley, finance professor, generalized Sharpe’s approach into a more flexible factor framework.
Instead of one factor driving correlations, Rosenberg postulated many such
factors—around 60—to capture the observed correlation structure in the US
equity market:
J

rn = ∑ X nj ⋅ b j + un .
j =1

(3.15)

Equation 3.15 states that the excess return to asset n consists of its exposures, Xnj, to a set of common factor returns, bj, plus an idiosyncratic return,
un, driven by issues specific to asset n.
For example, the excess return to ExxonMobil is due partly to the return
to the oil industry, partly to returns to large stocks relative to small stocks,
and partly to issues specific to ExxonMobil (e.g., the CEO’s decision to retire
and become US secretary of state). ExxonMobil is correlated with other
stocks either because they are exposed to the same factors or because they
are exposed to factors that are correlated. One key component of Rosenberg’s
factor model was that the idiosyncratic returns were uncorrelated: The
model separated the common components of return from the idiosyncratic
components.
Rosenberg’s factor modeling approach added significant mathematical
and computational complexity beyond Sharpe’s model. It led to much more
accurate forecasts of risk, but that wasn’t sufficient to generate broad interest
among investors. That interest followed from his choice of intuitive factors
28

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved.

3. The Modern History of Investment Management

that resonated with them. Rosenberg’s factors consisted of industries and
investment styles (such as value and momentum).
Beyond writing a paper describing this approach, Rosenberg founded
Barra, a company that provided factor models and associated analytics to
investors. Investors didn’t need to build their own factor models or run the
calculations. They just needed to subscribe to Barra. Rosenberg was providing
the tools of modern portfolio theory broadly to all investors.
Given the educational challenge of training investment managers to
actually use modern portfolio theory, Barra started running annual seminars
in Pebble Beach, California. In those early days, the seminars lasted four days
and Rosenberg was the only speaker. I joined Barra in 1987—after Rosenberg
had left Barra to start Rosenberg Institutional Equity Management
(RIEM)—and by then, the seminars included talks by many different speakers (mainly Barra employees). The aura surrounding those conferences helped
inspire the Institutional Investor magazine cover story in May 1978, “Who
Is Barr Rosenberg and What the Hell Is He Talking About?”30 The cover
illustration shows Rosenberg sitting in a lotus position on a mountain top—
wearing a flowing garment, with flowers in his hair—surrounded by (much
smaller) genuflecting investment managers in suits and ties. Clearly, modern
portfolio theory was becoming mainstream.
The factor models for risk developed by Barr Rosenberg made several
contributions. They accurately forecasted risk, an improvement over the onefactor market model. They provided a coherent risk framework for investing,
neatly organizing the various places that investors could try to outperform:
betting on industries or factors, focusing on idiosyncratic (individual security)
returns, or some blend of the two. The factor models simplified the calculations required by Markowitz optimization. Overall, Rosenberg accelerated
the adoption of modern portfolio theory and, especially, placed risk at the
center of investing.
The shortfall of Rosenberg’s factor approach was its requirement that we
identify all the common factors driving investment returns. It is not easy to
do so.
Overall, Rosenberg’s innovations had a huge impact on the investment
business. They provided a compelling and usable risk framework for investors.
They turned modern portfolio theory into a reality. And from small beginnings, trillions of dollars are now managed using factor models provided by
Barra and its competitors.

30

Welles (1978).

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved. 

29

The Future of Investment Management

Stephen Ross and the Arbitrage Pricing Theory. Just as Barr
Rosenberg had generalized Sharpe’s market model to more accurate factor
models of risk, in 1976, Stephen Ross generalized the CAPM, taking multiple factors into account in forecasting returns. His approach, the arbitrage
pricing theory (APT), underlies today’s increasingly popular smart beta/factor strategies.
Whereas Sharpe and the other developers of the CAPM assumed that
all investors share the same assumptions and derived an equilibrium solution, Ross started with a factor model of risk and applied an approximate
no-arbitrage condition.
Starting with the factor model (Equation 3.15) and the assumption that
Corr{un , um } = 0 for n ≠ m,

(3.16)

the arbitrage pricing theory states that
E{un } = 0.

(3.17)

This looks similar to the CAPM result that the expected residual return
is zero, but the logic is quite different.
Here is the arbitrage argument: If E{un } ≠ 0, then we could build a portfolio with positive expected return and almost zero risk. Because the specific returns are uncorrelated, we should be able to diversify away almost all
the risk.
The other side of Ross’s argument is that expected returns must connect
to risk factors:
J

E{rn } = ∑ X nj ⋅ m j ,
j =1

(3.18)

where
m j = E{ b j }.

(3.19)

Ross didn’t specify the risk factors or say how to estimate their expected
returns. But from the no-arbitrage condition, he showed that expected returns
are related to risk factors.
The arbitrage pricing theory’s contribution was to provide a detailed theory connecting expected returns directly to risk. It provided a flexible framework for estimating expected return. In terms of shortfalls, it was all theory,

30

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved.

3. The Modern History of Investment Management

with little guidance on choosing factors. But—make no mistake—providing
a risk-based framework for active management was a significant innovation.
Now the APT could be consistent with the CAPM if the expected factor returns were all proportional to their betas with respect to the market
portfolio. But the APT didn’t require that. In general, it offered a way of outperforming the market by choosing a more efficient mix of factors than that
of the market portfolio. I believed Stephen Ross would win the Nobel Prize
for this work, and Martin Leibowitz commented that he would have been
one of the more deserving recipients, but unfortunately, Ross died before that
could happen.
Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky on Psychology and Behavioral
Finance. The APT arose out of advances in financial economics. The next
development, behavioral finance, arose from a much less expected place:
psychology.
Much of economic theory assumes that individuals are rational utility
maximizers. That is, we all have utility functions that describe the value we
receive for every possible activity and outcome, and we make all decisions so
as to maximize our utility. That’s clearly an approximation of reality; individuals aren’t perfectly rational, after all. However, economists assumed that the
deviations from rationality were random and would average out over larger
populations.
Psychologists Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky (1979) showed
that humans are not only irrational but systematically irrational. Their article “Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision under Risk” described how
humans make predictable and repeatable mistakes. We can classify these mistakes into three categories31:
•• Social interactions (conforming, follow-the-crowd behaviors)
•• Heuristic simplification (generalizing from personal experience and
recent events)
•• Self-deception (overconfidence—e.g., attributing positive outcomes to
skill and negative outcomes to luck)
Although Kahneman and Tversky developed and tested their ideas by
observing human behaviors in the military and in psychology experiments
conducted on undergraduates, the implications for investing are clear. For
example, heuristic simplification (extrapolating from recent events) may
explain why value stocks outperform growth stocks. Investors may incorrectly
31

Hirshleifer (2001).

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved. 

31

The Future of Investment Management

extrapolate recent earnings growth into the future, thereby overpricing
growth stocks and underpricing value stocks.
This work led to Kahneman’s Nobel Prize in Economic Sciences in 2002;
Tversky would undoubtedly have shared that prize had he still been alive at
the time. Michael Lewis’s 2017 book The Undoing Project provides an insightful view into the relationship between these two very different people with
very different backgrounds.
Kahneman and Tversky’s work made several important contributions. Financial economics studies humans interacting in financial markets.
Behavioral finance advances our understanding of human behavior in that
endeavor. Critically important for active management, behavioral finance
implies that successful active management is possible and points the way by
identifying exploitable behaviors.
Behavioral finance also made an important contribution to academic
finance, which in the years after the development of the CAPM and the
EMH had evolved into a cult of market efficiency. Academics couldn’t publish papers questioning market efficiency, and even pursuing research in that
direction could threaten their careers. As academia slowly embraced behavioral finance, the inhibiting chains of market efficiency fell away.
Behavioral finance does have some shortcomings. First, with those undergraduate psychology experiments in mind, Mark Rubinstein (2001, p. 16)
commented that the behavioral argument against rational markets “requires
that we extrapolate from studies of individual decision makers done in narrow and restricted conditions to the complex and subtle environment of the
security markets.” Perhaps the behavioral biases uncovered by Kahneman and
Tversky ring true as general observations of human behavior, but do they hold
true in investment markets?
Second, another shortfall of behavioral finance is that it lacks a coherent
overall framework, even almost 40 years after that first publication. It is a collection of interesting ideas rather than a coherent theory.
Third, regarding how investors have used behavioral finance, it has mainly
provided ex post justification for effects we already knew about (e.g., that value
stocks have outperformed growth stocks) rather than pointing toward previously undiscovered investment strategies.
Still, behavioral finance is one of the strongest arguments for the possibility of successful active management.
Sanford Grossman, Joseph Stiglitz, and Informationally Inefficient
Markets. In 1980, Sanford Grossman and Joseph Stiglitz published a paper
that supported successful active management and even argued that active
32

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved.

3. The Modern History of Investment Management

management plays an important role in the economy by obtaining valuable information and helping set informed prices. In their article “On the
Impossibility of Informationally Efficient Markets,” they criticized the efficient market hypothesis by pointing out that because information is costly,
market prices can’t fully reflect all available information. If they did, then
informed investors couldn’t be compensated for their efforts to obtain that
information. No investors would bother to become informed, and so prices
couldn’t reflect all available information.
Market prices can fully reflect all available information only in the special case where information is costless. However, obviously, information is
not cost free. Also, more subtly, if information were costless, why even have
secondary markets? We would know prices without the need for trading to
convey information.
Grossman and Stiglitz (1980) helped active management strike back by
pointing out a paradox at the heart of the efficient market hypothesis. Active
managers must be compensated for their efforts in uncovering valuable
intelligence.
Robert Shiller and Excess Volatility. Robert Shiller (1981) provided
another compelling argument for the possibility of successful active management. He compared John Burr Williams’s (1938) Theory of Investment Value
with observed stock prices. If stock prices are predictions of discounted future
cash flows, they should be less volatile than the actual discounted cash flows.
But instead, they are more volatile. This excess volatility means that stocks are
sometimes overpriced and sometimes underpriced. Although excess volatility doesn’t point to any specific active strategy, it adds to the arguments that
successful active management is possible. Thanks to Shiller, we know that
stocks are often mispriced. Shiller shared the 2013 Nobel Prize in Economic
Sciences for this work.

The Evolution of Investing
Over the past 100 years or so, investing has evolved from a few rules of thumb
based on poor or nonexistent data to a world increasingly dominated by theory
and systematic approaches. Active management still dominates, but investors
now understand it as a bet against the benchmark of indexing. And indexing
and systematic active management are both increasingly popular.

Appendix
In preparing the material in this chapter and presenting it to audiences at
Stellenbosch University and the London Quant Group Oxford seminar, as
© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved. 

33

The Future of Investment Management

well as at BlackRock, I received many suggestions of important intellectual
milestones to include. I have included some of those suggestions but chose
to leave out many more—not because they didn’t represent important breakthroughs, but because, in my opinion, they were not sufficiently central to
the development of investment management. Those developments include the
following:
•• James Tobin’s mutual fund separation theory, on which he published an
article in the Review of Economic Studies in 1958. It showed that just two
efficient frontier portfolios span the entire efficient frontier—that is, we
can achieve the expected return and risk of any point on the efficient
frontier as a combination of any two specific portfolios on the efficient
frontier.
•• Alfred Winslow Jones’s concept of “relative velocity,” which he described
in a 1961 report to his investors—a precursor to market beta that allowed
him to manage the world’s first hedge fund.
•• Edward Thorp’s Beat the Market, published in 1967. This book made use
of the Kelly criterion, developed by J.L. Kelly, Jr., in 1956, to determine
the bet size needed to maximize growth in wealth.
•• Milgrom and Stokey’s 1982 article “Information, Trade and Common
Knowledge.” It argues that one trader receiving private information will
not create incentives to trade when everyone has rational expectations.

Bibliography
Ancell, Kate. 2012. “The Origin of the First Index Fund.” University of
Chicago Booth School of Business publication (28 March). https://research.
chicagobooth.edu/fama-miller/docs/the-origin-of-the-first-index-fund.pdf.
Bernstein, Peter L. 1992. Capital Ideas: The Improbable Origins of Modern Wall
Street, 2nd ed. New York: Free Press.
———. 2007. Capital Ideas Evolving. Hoboken: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Black, Fischer, Michael C. Jensen, and Myron Scholes. 1972. “The Capital
Asset Pricing Model: Some Empirical Tests.” In Studies in the Theory of
Capital Markets, edited by Michael C. Jensen, 249–65. New York: Praeger.
Black, Fischer, and Myron Scholes. 1973. “The Pricing of Options and
Corporate Liabilities.” Journal of Political Economy 81 (3): 637–654.

34

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved.

3. The Modern History of Investment Management

———. 1974. “From Theory to a New Financial Product.” Journal of Finance
29 (2): 399–412.
Fama, Eugene F. 1970. “Efficient Capital Markets: A Review of Theory and
Empirical Work.” Journal of Finance 25 (2): 383–417.
Goetzmann, William N. 2016. Money Changes Everything: How Finance
Made Civilization Possible. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Graham, Benjamin. 1973. The Intelligent Investor, 4th ed. New York: Harper.
Graham, Benjamin, and David L. Dodd. 2009. Security Analysis, 6th ed.
New York: McGraw-Hill.
Grinold, Richard C., and Ronald N. Kahn. 2000. Active Portfolio Management,
2nd ed. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Grossman, Sanford J., and Joseph E. Stiglitz. 1980. “On the Impossibility
of Informationally Efficient Markets.” American Economic Review 70 (3):
393–408.
Hirshleifer, David. 2001. “Investor Psychology and Asset Pricing.” Journal of
Finance 56 (4): 1533–97.
Jahnke, William W. 1990. “The Development of Structured Portfolio
Management: A Contextual View.” In Quantitative International Investing: A
Handbook of Analytical and Methodological Techniques and Strategies, edited by
Brian Bruce, 153–81. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Jones, A.W. 1961. “Basic Report to the Limited Partners.” Described in
valuewalk.com/2016/05/a-w-jones-letters/.
Kahneman, Daniel, and Amos Tversky. 1979. “Prospect Theory: An Analysis
of Decision under Risk.” Econometrica 47 (2): 263–91.
Kelly, J.L. 1956. “A New Interpretation of Information Rate.” Bell System
Technical Journal 35 (4): 917–26.
Lewis, Michael. 2017. The Undoing Project: A Friendship That Changed Our
Minds. New York: W.W. Norton & Company.
Lintner, John. 1965. “The Valuation of Risk Assets and the Selection of Risky
Investments in Stock Portfolios and Capital Budgets.” Review of Economics
and Statistics 47 (1): 13–37.
Lowenfeld, Henry. 1909. Investment: An Exact Science. London: Financial
Review of Reviews.
© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved. 

35

The Future of Investment Management

Markowitz, Harry. 1952. “Portfolio Selection.” Journal of Finance 7 (1): 77–91.
———. 1990. “Foundations of Portfolio Theory.” Nobel Lecture
(7 December).
Mehrling, Perry. 2005. Fischer Black and the Revolutionary Idea of Finance.
Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.
Milgrom, Paul, and Nancy Stokey. 1982. “Information, Trade and Common
Knowledge.” Journal of Economic Theory 26 (1): 17–27.
Mossin, Jan. 1966. “Equilibrium in a Capital Asset Market.” Econometrica 34
(4): 768–83.
Niederhoffer, Victor. 1997. The Education of a Speculator. New York: John
Wiley & Sons.
Rosenberg, Barr. 1974. “Extra-Market Components of Covariance in Security
Markets.” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 9 (2): 263–74.
Ross, Stephen A. 1976. “The Arbitrage Theory of Capital Asset Pricing.”
Journal of Economic Theory 13 (3): 341–60.
Rubinstein, Mark. 2001. “Rational Markets: Yes or No? The Affirmative
Case.” Financial Analysts Journal 57 (3): 15–29.
———. 2006. A History of the Theory of Investments. Hoboken, NJ: John
Wiley & Sons.
Sharpe, William F. 1963. “A Simplified Model for Portfolio Analysis.”
Management Science 9 (2): 277–93.
———. 1964. “Capital Asset Prices: A Theory of Market Equilibrium under
Conditions of Risk.” Journal of Finance 19 (3): 425–42.
Shiller, Robert. 1981. “Do Stock Prices Move Too Much to Be Justified
by Subsequent Changes in Dividends?” American Economic Review 71 (3):
421–36.
Thorp, Edward. 1967. Beat the Market: A Scientific Stock Market System.
New York: Random House.
Tobin, James. 1958. “Liquidity Preference as Behavior towards Risk.” Review
of Economic Studies 25 (1): 65–86.
Treynor, Jack. 1961. “Toward a Theory of the Market Value of Risky Assets.”
Unpublished manuscript.

36

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved.

3. The Modern History of Investment Management

Treynor, Jack L., and Fischer Black. 1973. “How to Use Security Analysis to
Improve Portfolio Selection.” Journal of Business 46 (1): 66–86.
Welles, Chris. 1978. “Who Is Barr Rosenberg and What the Hell Is He
Talking About?” Institutional Investor (May): 59-66.
Williams, John Burr. 1938. The Theory of Investment Value. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved. 

37

4. Seven Insights into Active Management
Give me insight into today, and you may have the antique and future worlds.
—Ralph Waldo Emerson

By the early 1970s, a number of academic developments held out hope
for the possibility of successful active management. In this chapter, I delve in
more mathematical detail into seven insights that emerged in roughly the following 20-year period. Some of these ideas appeared in well-known papers,
my book with Richard Grinold, Active Portfolio Management, and in the 1999
summary, Seven Quantitative Insights into Active Management, published by
Barra (now MSCI) and Barclays Global Investors (now BlackRock).32 This
chapter is a bit more mathematical than the prior chapters focused on history, though a basic understanding of these insights will not require too much
math. And this chapter builds on mathematical concepts introduced already.
The chapter also provides a detailed view into systematic thinking about
active management.
When I discussed Treynor and Black’s work on using security analysis
to improve portfolio selection, I introduced alpha as forecast residual return.
The capital asset pricing model states that the expected residual return is
zero. However, the active manager, having identified some useful information, forecasts residual returns not equal to zero. Much of the job of an active
manager is to forecast residual returns. Active managers can also forecast
market returns, and some do. As I show in this chapter, however, it’s difficult to deliver consistent performance by implementing such forecasts (timing
the market). Note that active managers and investors use the term alpha for
several different things: forecast or realized residual or active return (where
active return is simply the return minus the benchmark return).33 I consistently use alpha to denote forecast residual returns. If I need to discuss any of
its other meanings, I explicitly clarify them. Treynor and Black connected the
forecast alphas to portfolio positions. I presented their final result, though not
the analysis. For the purposes of this chapter, I need to connect forecast residual returns with optimal portfolios. I do this via Markowitz mean–variance
optimization. Given our alpha forecasts and risk forecasts for any possible
Grinold and Kahn (2000); Kahn (1999).
The difference between active return and residual return may be thought of as follows:
Active return is simply the arithmetic difference between the return on an asset or portfolio
and that of its benchmark. To calculate the residual return, one leverages the benchmark up or
down to match the beta risk of the asset or portfolio and then calculates the difference.
32

33

38

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved.

4. Seven Insights into Active Management

portfolio, we can find the portfolio that achieves the highest expected alpha
for any given risk level. In particular, I define utility as follows:
Utility = hT ⋅ α − λhT ⋅ V ⋅ h
= α P − λω P2 .

(4.1)

In Equation 4.1, h is the vector of portfolio holdings, a is the vector of
forecast alphas, V is the covariance matrix for the assets, l is the risk-aversion
parameter capturing investor preferences, and w measures risk.
We choose the portfolio that maximizes utility. To do that, we take the
derivative of the utility with respect to each of the holdings and set those
equal to zero. For the optimal portfolio, Q   ,
α = 2λV ⋅ hQ .

(4.2)

Equation 4.2 directly connects our forecast alphas to portfolio positions.
As we vary the risk-aversion parameter, l, the optimal portfolio will vary.
The overweights and underweights (or long positions and short positions) will
scale up and down. In this way, the optimal portfolio risk will vary with risk
aversion.

Insight 1. Active Management Is a Zero-Sum Game
William F. Sharpe published “The Arithmetic of Active Management” in
1991. It is a two-page paper containing no equations whatsoever. In it, he
makes a simple argument:
•• The sum of all active management and index management positions is the
market.
•• The sum of all index management positions is the market.
•• Hence, the sum of all active management positions is the market.
Based on this simple argument that active management in aggregate
sums to the market, Sharpe concluded that the (asset-weighted) average active
manager matches the market’s performance before fees and costs. This is true
whether or not the market is efficient. So, after fees and costs, the average
active manager must underperform the market. Index funds are above-median
performers, once again independent of whether the market is efficient.
Sharpe’s argument is quite powerful, though he does make a few
assumptions. He assumes that all index management positions sum to the
market. This assumption isn’t exactly true even for just the broad market
© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved. 

39

The Future of Investment Management

index funds, because those funds are often managed to different indexes.
In the United States, we have broad market index funds managed against
the S&P 500, the Russell 1000 Index, and the MSCI USA Index—not to
mention broad market small-cap indexes. There are also sector and other notbroad index funds whose positions wouldn’t necessarily sum to the market.
On the active management side, professional active managers are trying to
outperform market indexes. There are also investors who hold non-marketcap-weighted portfolios (which are active because they differ from the market)
but who are not professional active managers. These investors hold positions,
often with little active trading, either because their holdings might be part
of executive compensation, because trading would trigger significant capital
gains, or for other reasons.
Still, considerable empirical evidence supports the key implication of
Sharpe’s arithmetic of active management: that the average active manager underperforms the market. For example, Eugene Fama and Kenneth
French (2010) showed that active US equity mutual funds have produced a
realized alpha of roughly zero on average before fees over the period from
1984 through 2006. They estimated the average realized alpha after fees to
be somewhere between –0.81% and –1.13% per year, with the exact number
depending on whether they control for one, three, or four factors. My definition of alpha controls for only one factor—the market (or a broad market
index)—but Fama and French also controlled for size and value factors and in
their four-factor analysis, momentum.
There are at least three important implications of the arithmetic of active
management. First, tests of whether successful active management is possible
need to look beyond average active performance. We know that the average
active manager will underperform every year, even if few successful active
managers outperform year after year. Relatedly, if you want to become an
active manager, it’s not good enough to be average. You need to believe that
you can consistently be a top-quartile active manager.
The second implication is that broad market index funds will be consistent
second-quartile (or at least above-median) performers. This performance is
independent of the efficiency of the market, and it provides a strong argument
in favor of indexing. Unless the investor has the ability to identify successful
active managers, he is better off with indexing. Otherwise, he is randomly
choosing managers with negative expected alpha.
The third implication is that the burden of proof is on active managers to
demonstrate that their expected active returns will more than compensate for
added risk and cost.
40

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved.

4. Seven Insights into Active Management

Insight 2. Information Ratios Determine Added Value
Let’s focus on the active manager’s job: outperforming a benchmark.
Active managers build portfolios by trading off alpha against residual risk
(denoted by w and shortened to simply “risk” in this discussion). As noted
previously, the utility, or added value, from active management is given in
Equation 4.1.
Individual preferences enter into the utility only in how individuals trade
off residual return against risk. More risk-averse investors will demand more
incremental return for each unit of risk.
The information ratio is the manager’s ratio of residual return to risk:
IRP =

αP
.
ωP

(4.3)

We will consider this a fundamental constant defining the manager,
assuming it does not vary with time or the level of risk. A manager can deliver
more residual return only by taking on more risk:
α P = IRP ⋅ ω P .

(4.4)

This assertion is exactly true in the absence of constraints. For example,
if the manager overweights one position by 5% and underweights another by
3%, leading to a given forecast alpha, she can double both the alpha and the
risk by increasing the overweight to 10% and the underweight to 6%.
Understanding Information Ratios. We can think of the information
ratio as a measure of consistency of performance—that is, the probability that
the manager will realize positive residual returns every period. Exhibit 4.1
shows the probability distribution of annual alphas for three different information ratio distributions.
In this simple illustration, all three distributions have a residual risk level
of 2% and the residual returns are normally distributed. As the information
ratio increases, the distribution simply shifts to the right. The probability of
realizing a positive residual return is simply the area under the curve to the
right of a = 0. This probability strictly increases in this example as the information ratio increases.
Even if we are comparing distributions with differing risk levels, if the
residual returns are normally distributed, we find that the probability of realizing a positive residual return over one year is
Pr{α > 0} = Φ{ IR },
© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved. 

(4.5)
41

The Future of Investment Management
Exhibit 4.1. Alpha Distributions
Probability Distribution (%)
2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0

–10

–8

–6

–4
IR = 0

–2

0

Alpha (%)
IR = 0.5

2

4

6

8

10

IR = 1.0

where F is the cumulative normal distribution function. At least in the normal distribution case, the consistency of performance is a monotonic function
of the information ratio: The higher the information ratio, the more likely it is
that the manager will realize positive residual return in any period. Although
residual returns are not exactly normally distributed, we do generally observe
that consistency of performance increases with information ratios.
Utility Analysis. Using Equation 4.4, we can rewrite the utility (i.e., the
added value) as
Utility = IRP ⋅ω P − λω P2 .

(4.6)

Exhibit 4.2 shows graphically how utility depends on risk. The active
manager chooses the portfolio corresponding to the maximum point in
Exhibit 4.2. At this point,
ω* =
42

IRP
.
2λ

(4.7)
© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved.

4. Seven Insights into Active Management
Exhibit 4.2.

Utility as a Function of Risk

Utility
U*

0

ω*

Risk

U* =

( IRP )2
.
4λ

(4.8)

Equation 4.7 describes the optimal level of residual risk, w*. Optimal
residual risk depends inversely on risk aversion and directly on the information ratio. More-risk-averse investors will choose lower levels of residual risk.
The higher the information ratio—and as we have seen, the higher the consistency of performance—the more residual risk an investor will tolerate.
Each investor’s maximum added value depends, according to Equation 4.8,
directly on the square of the information ratio and inversely on the risk aversion. This is the critical point. It means that a very risk-averse investor, one
with a very high value of l, will maximize added value by investing with the
manager with the highest information ratio. But a risk-tolerant investor, with
a low value of l, will reach exactly the same conclusion. The only difference
between the two is how much they will invest with that manager versus an
index fund, the zero-residual-risk choice.
All investors, regardless of their preferences, will agree that the highest
information ratio can provide the most value. Equation 4.8 shows that information ratios determine added value.
© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved. 

43

The Future of Investment Management

Typical Values for Information Ratios. Given the central role of information ratios, it is useful to know their typical values. Based on research at
Barra and BlackRock, the typical before-expenses distribution of information
ratios is shown in Exhibit 4.3, and specific empirical results are shown in
Exhibit 4.4.
Exhibit 4.3 shows the typical distribution numbers. A top-quartile manager can add 50 bps of realized residual return for every 100 bps of residual
risk, before expenses. This finding holds for both equity and fixed-income
funds. Exhibit 4.4 shows results for studies of US equity mutual funds and
institutional portfolios, and fixed-income institutional portfolios over the
five-year period from 2003 through 2007. These studies used Sharpe (1992)
style analysis to separate style from selection return for each fund. The style
Exhibit 4.3. Typical Distribution of Information Ratios
Percentile

IR

Pr{a > 0}

90

1.0

84%

0.0

50

75

0.5

25

–0.5

50
10

69
31

–1.0

16

Source: Grinold and Kahn (2000).

Exhibit 4.4. Information Ratio Empirical Results
Information Ratios
Equity
Percentile
90

Mutual Funds

Long-Only Inst.

Long–Short Inst.

Institutional

Average

1.04

0.77

1.17

0.96

0.99

0.2

0.02

0.25

0.01

0.12

75

0.64

25

–0.21

50
10

Fixed Income

–0.62

0.42

0.57

–0.38

–0.22

–0.77

–0.58

0.5

–0.45
–0.9

0.53

–0.32
–0.72

Notes: These results are for US data over the five-year period from January 2003 through December
2007. Empirical studies included 338 equity mutual funds, 1,679 equity long-only institutional
funds, 56 equity long–short institutional funds, and 537 fixed-income mutual funds.
Source: BlackRock.

44

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved.

4. Seven Insights into Active Management

component of the return represents the effective benchmark of each fund.
Exhibit 4.3 shows information ratios of the selection returns. Exact results
will vary with the historical period, the asset class under review, and the
methodology. These empirical results are roughly consistent with the data in
Exhibit 4.3.

Insight 3. Allocate Risk Budget in Proportion
to Information Ratios
Insight 2 showed that investors should choose active managers on the basis of
their information ratios. What should an investor do when confronted with
many investment choices, with a variety of information ratios? The investor will find the highest-information-ratio manager the most attractive, but
should the investor place all his money with that manager?
We can also analyze this situation with mean–variance optimization.
Let’s say the investor has identified N different managers, each offering a particular expected alpha, α n , at residual risk wn and hence information ratio IRn.
For simplicity, assume that these managers’ residual returns are all uncorrelated. We don’t need to make this assumption, but it simplifies the analytical
results.
The investor places a fraction hn with each manager. The portfolio alpha
and risk are
N

α P = ∑ hn ⋅ α n .
n =1
N

ω P2 = ∑ hn2 ⋅ ω n2 .
n =1

(4.9)

(4.10)

The investor chooses allocations to maximize her utility. The results are
hn* =

αn
IRn
⇒
.
2
2λω n
2λω n

(4.11)

IRn
.
2λ

(4.12)

hn* ⋅ ω n =

Equation 4.11 shows that the investor optimally allocates capital in proportion to information ratios divided by risk. But, perhaps more naturally,
Equation 4.12 shows that the investor allocates risk in proportion to information
© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved. 

45

The Future of Investment Management

ratios. The quantity hn* ⋅ ω n is the investor’s capital allocation times the risk,
which is the risk allocation. It measures how much risk the investment contributes at the portfolio level. For example, if the investor places 20% of the capital
in a fund with 5% risk, that allocation contributes 1% risk at the portfolio level.
The key observation here: Investors allocate risk in proportion to information ratios.34 The investor does not allocate all the capital, and all the risk,
to the best manager—that is, the manager with the highest information ratio.
She allocates the most risk to that manager but still diversifies among other
managers because she does not know which manager will have the best performance after the fact; the information ratio is just an expectation, not a
guarantee, of performance.

Insight 4. Alphas Must Control for Skill, Volatility,
and Expectations
This insight shows how to process raw information into alphas, which are
critical inputs for active management.
Raw signals, such as analyst earnings forecasts, broker buy/sell recommendations, and the number of cars in a Walmart parking lot the week before
Christmas, hopefully contain information useful in forecasting returns. But
these raw data are not alphas (expected residual returns). They are not even
necessarily denominated in units of return.
A basic forecasting formula governs the connection between these raw
signals and alphas. This formula refines the raw signals into alphas by controlling for expectations, skill, and volatility. In many cases, we can simplify
this formula to a particularly intuitive form.
The basic forecasting formula provides the best linear unbiased estimate
(BLUE) of the residual return, q, given the raw signal, g:
E{θ | g } = E{θ} + Cov{θ, g } ⋅ Var −1 { g } ⋅ [ g − E{ g }].

(4.13)

According to Equation 4.13, the expected residual return conditional on
g equals the unconditional expected residual return plus a term that depends
For those worried about our assumption that these investment choices are uncorrelated, if
we take correlations into account, we find that
34

h ⋅ω =

ρ −1 ⋅ IR
.
2λ

Here, h is the vector of capital allocations, w is a diagonal matrix with residual risks on the
diagonal, r is the correlation matrix, and IR is a vector of information ratios.

46

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved.

4. Seven Insights into Active Management

on the difference between the observed signal and its unconditional expectation. Reordering terms, we see that
E{θ | g } − E{θ} ≡ α = Cov{θ, g } ⋅ Var −1 { g } ⋅ [ g − E{ g }].

(4.14)

As discussed at the beginning of this chapter, the unconditional expected
residual return is zero, and alpha is the expected residual return conditional
on the manager’s information, g.
This formula controls for expectations. Only if g differs from its unconditional expectation will the expected residual return differ from its unconditional expectation. Put another way, only if g differs from its unconditional
expectation will the expected alpha differ from zero.
This result is intuitive. If company earnings exactly match expectations,
we do not expect the stock to move. Movement happens only when earnings
do not match expectations.
Now let’s simplify Equation 4.14 into a more intuitive form that reveals
how alphas include controls for skill and volatility. The definitions of variance
and covariance tell us the following:
Va r{ g } = [StDev{g }]2 .

(4.15)

Cov{θ, g } = Corr{θ, g } ⋅ StDev{θ} ⋅ StDev{ g }.

(4.16)

Substituting Equations 4.15 and 4.16 into Equation 4.14 leads to
 g − E{ g } 
α = Corr{θ, g } ⋅ StDev{θ} ⋅ 
.
 StDev{g } 

(4.17)

We commonly refer to the correlation of the signal and the subsequent
realization as the information coefficient (IC), and the standard deviation of the
residual return is the residual risk (w). We refer to the standardized raw signal
as a z-score, or score for short, because by construction it has a mean of 0 and
a standard deviation of 1. If the z-scores are normally distributed or close to
normally distributed, then about 95% of the time z will range from –2 to +2.
That is usually the case, but we will not assume that it is always true. Putting
this together, we get
α = IC ⋅ ω ⋅ z.

(4.18)

We have decomposed alpha into three components: an information coefficient, a volatility, and a score.
© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved. 

47

The Future of Investment Management

Equation 4.18 clearly shows how alphas control for skill, volatility, and
expectations. The information coefficient is a measure of skill. With no
skill—that is, no correlation between signal and subsequent return—the
information coefficient is zero and Equation 4.18 sets the alpha to zero, as it
should. The greater the skill, the greater the alpha, other things equal.
Understanding Skill. It is useful to provide some context for this
important measure of skill. First, Exhibit 4.5 shows the range of typical
information coefficients.
These correlations are small. Consistent with the arithmetic of active
management, the average information coefficient is zero. But even a great
information coefficient is only 0.1. We know that, as a correlation, the maximum possible information coefficient is 1. But these numbers are much lower
than that. Forecasting residual returns is difficult. To better understand these
magnitudes, we can relate the information coefficient to a simpler measure
of skill: how often the manager correctly forecasts the sign of the residual
return. If the manager gets the sign right only 50% of the time, he doesn’t
have skill. If we assume that residual returns and forecast errors are normally
distributed and that the information coefficient is much less than 1, we find
that the fraction of times the manager correctly forecasts the sign is
 IC 
 1  1
fr =   +   ⋅ Arctan 

 2  π
 1 − IC 2 

(4.19)

 1   IC 
≈   +   for IC << 1.
 2  π 

We can see more explicitly that if the information coefficient is zero, the
manager correctly forecasts the sign of the residual return 50% of the time.
But as the information coefficient increases, the manager correctly forecasts
the sign more than 50% of the time. Exhibit 4.6 expands Exhibit 4.5 to convert information coefficients into probabilities of forecasting the correct sign.
Exhibit 4.6 and Equation 4.19 help us understand how difficult it is to
correctly forecast residual returns. An exceptional information coefficient of
Exhibit 4.5. Typical Information Coefficients
Skill

IC

Average

0.00

Great

0.10

Good

48

0.05

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved.

4. Seven Insights into Active Management
Exhibit 4.6. Probability of Forecasting the Correct Sign
Skill

IC

fr

Average

0.00

50.0%

Great

0.10

53.2

Good

0.05

51.6

0.1 corresponds to correctly forecasting the sign of the residual return about
53% of the time. I soon show that the key to turning that small edge in each
investment decision into a high information ratio is diversification.
Volatility serves two purposes in Equation 4.18. First, it causes the forecast alpha to be expressed in units of return. The information coefficient and
the score are dimensionless. Second, it controls the alpha for volatility. For
a given skill level, imagine two stocks with equally bullish scores of +1. We
believe both stocks will go up. Equation 4.18 says that the higher-volatility
stock will go up more. If both a low-volatility utility stock and a highvolatility technology stock achieve earnings one standard deviation above
expectations, the technology stock should rise more. Both stocks will rise, but
the technology stock will rise more than the utility stock.
Keep in mind that optimal holdings are roughly proportional to alpha
divided by residual variance. Even if we give the more volatile stock the
higher alpha, it will receive a smaller position. The amount of risk we take in
each position, though, is proportional to the score.
The score implements the control for expectations because it has an
expectation of zero. Only when the signal doesn’t match expectations does
the score differ from zero.
Understanding the three constituent parts of an alpha can inform our
intuition. It can also provide structure in unstructured situations, where the
connections between raw signals and alphas are unclear.
Examples. The ultimate example of an unstructured situation is a stock
tip. Even in this case, Equation 4.18 can provide structure. Imagine that the
stock in question has a residual volatility of 20%. Exhibit 4.7 shows the range
of possible alphas as a function of the information coefficient and score.
Because stock tips are always presented as very, very positive (“I make
only one or two recommendations a year, and you are the first person I
called …”), converting from the tip to an alpha requires only estimating the
tipper’s information coefficient. Ask yourself, Is Warren Buffett on the line,
or is it someone you have never heard of?

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved. 

49

The Future of Investment Management
Exhibit 4.7. Alpha of a Stock Tip
Very Positive:

Very, Very Positive:

Great: 0.10

2

4%

Average: 0.0

0

0

z=1

IC
Good: 0.05

z=2

1

2

Exhibit 4.8. Broker Buy/Sell Alphas: Information Coefficient of 0.05
w

View

Score

Alpha

15%

Buy

1

0.75%

15%

Sell

–1

–0.75

Sell

–1

–1.25

20%
30%
25%

Buy
Buy

1
1

1.00
1.50

For an institutional money manager, a more relevant example involves
converting broker buy/sell recommendations into alphas. This common
situation has relatively little structure, but understanding alphas can help.
Exhibit 4.8 shows an example, assuming that the broker has a good information coefficient of 0.05.
Our conversion from recommendations to scores is straightforward.
Notice that the first two stocks in the list, both recommended, have different
alphas. We expect the second stock, with a higher volatility, to go up more
than the first stock. Contrast this with simply giving every stock on the buy
list an alpha of 1%. If all the buy recommendations have the same expected
returns, an optimizer would choose the minimum-risk portfolio of those buy
recommendations—loading up on the least volatile stocks.

Insight 5. The Fundamental Law of Active Management:
Information Ratios Depend on Skill, Diversification,
and Efficiency
Previously, we learned that the information ratio is the key to active management. Given that fact, how can we achieve high information ratios? Let’s
begin by looking at a relationship Richard Grinold first described in 1989 as
the “Fundamental Law of Active Management.” This law expresses the information ratio in terms of three other statistics—the information coefficient, a
50

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved.

4. Seven Insights into Active Management

measure of skill; breadth, a measure of diversification; and the transfer coefficient, a measure of efficiency of implementation:35
IR = IC ⋅ BR ⋅ TC.

(4.20)

We previously examined the information coefficient in detail, and we
know that it measures skill. If the information coefficient is zero, no correlation exists between a manager’s forecasts and the subsequent realizations, and
the manager’s information ratio is zero.
Understanding Breadth. Breadth—really breadth of skill—measures
the number of independent bets the manager takes per year at an average skill
level of IC. It measures diversification. We define breadth as bets per year
because we define the information ratio as an annualized quantity.
According to the fundamental law, to achieve a high information ratio,
a manager must demonstrate an edge in making individual investment decisions and then diversify that edge over many separate decisions. But breadth
is still a measure of the diversity of decisions to which the manager has skill
to apply. The fundamental law does not say that there is any advantage to
investing in asset classes about which the manager knows nothing.
Breadth is the part of the fundamental law that is hardest to understand.
As the number of independent bets per year, it is a rate, not a number. It’s not
the number of assets in the portfolio. We expect twice as many bets over two
years than one year, so the number of holdings isn’t the right concept.
To provide some additional insight into breadth, consider an investment process in equilibrium. Old information decays as new information
arrives. In equilibrium, the two are in balance, and so the information turnover rate, g, captures both the decay rate of old information and the arrival
rate of new information. We can capture this situation schematically with
Equation 4.21:
α n (t ) = e − γ ⋅∆t ⋅ α n (t − ∆t ) + sn (t ).

(4.21)

Equation 4.21 shows that old information decays over time and new
information, sn (t ), arrives over time. Equation 4.21 implies that the decay
and arrival of information happen somewhat continuously, which isn’t usually
true. It does show how old information (last period’s alpha forecast) decays
over time while new information keeps arriving. Assuming that these two
Grinold (1989) included only the first two terms, effectively assuming perfect implementation. Clarke, de Silva, and Thorley (2002) extended the fundamental law, adding the transfer
coefficient to account for imperfect implementation.
35

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved. 

51

The Future of Investment Management

processes are in balance, we can show that the breadth of this forecast is
BR = γ ⋅ N .

(4.22)

Equation 4.22 shows how the breadth relates to both the number of assets
under consideration and the information turnover rate.36
This result is useful. Given a signal for N assets over time, we can estimate the coefficient, g, using Equation 4.21 and then estimate breadth via
Equation 4.22. For example, if we run a cross-sectional regression of α (t )
against α (t − ∆t ), we can estimate e − γ ⋅∆t as a regression coefficient.
As a particular example, imagine we follow 300 stocks and every week we
receive new information on 12 of those stocks. We don’t know ahead of time
which 12 stocks the new information will cover. Our breadth is 12 × 52 = 624.
But we could also represent this information process as

 288  
p=
 No change,
 300  
.
α n (t ) = 

 12  
 New information, p =  300  



(4.23)

Because we cannot predict the new information, our expected alphas become
 288 
E{α n (t )} = 
⋅ α (t − ∆t ).
 300  n

(4.24)

But comparing Equations 4.24 and 4.21 leads us to estimate
 12 
γ ⋅ ∆t ≈ 
 300 

γ ⋅ N ⇒ 12 ⋅ 52 = 624.

(4.25)

The mathematical formalism of Equation 4.21 leads back to the intuitive
answer.
Non-Investment Example. Before considering the third term in the fundamental law, the transfer coefficient, let’s consider a non-investment example
of the law: the roulette wheel. The American roulette wheel includes the numbers 1 through 36, 0, and 00. Consider players betting that the roulette number
will be even. The players win if the number is 2, 4, 6, …, 36. The casino wins
if the number is 1, 3, 5, …, 35. The casino has a small edge because it also
36

See Grinold and Kahn (2011) for details.

52

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved.

4. Seven Insights into Active Management
Exhibit 4.9.

$2.5 Million Bet on One Spin of the Wheel

38 =

20/

18/3

%
52.6

8=4

7.4%

+$2.5 million

+100%

–$2.5 million

–100%

wins if the final number is 0 or 00. The roulette wheel can stop at 38 possible
numbers. The player wins if 18 of those numbers come up. The casino wins if
20 of those numbers come up. Now imagine that during the course of the year,
players bet a total of $2.5 million on this roulette wheel. Consider two possible
scenarios. In the first scenario, the players all agree to pool resources and bet all
$2.5 million on one spin of the wheel. In the second, that $2.5 million consists
of 100,000 spins of the wheel with a $25 bet on each spin.
Exhibit 4.9 shows the first scenario, from the casino’s perspective. The
casino has a 52.6% chance of winning $2.5 million and a 47.4% chance of
losing $2.5 million. Let’s analyze this situation in a bit more detail. View the
forecasts as ±1 and the realized returns as ±100%.
We start with the casino’s expected return and variance of return:
E{r } = 0.526(100%) + 0.474( −100%) = 5.2%.
Var{r } = 0.526(100% − 5.2%)2 + 0.474( −100% − 5.2%)2
= (99.9%)2 .

(4.26)
(4.27)

The casino’s expected return is 5.2%, and the standard deviation of the
return is 99.9%. In dollar terms, the casino’s expected winning is $130,000,
with a standard deviation of almost $2.5 million. The notably high standard
deviation isn’t surprising because the casino faces only two possible outcomes—
up 100% or down 100%—with the positive outcome only slightly more likely.
We can also calculate the casino’s information coefficient. It is positive
because it forecasts winning, and the casino does win 52.6% of the time:
Cov{r , g } = E {r ⋅ g } = 0.526( +1) + 0.474( −1) = 0.052
IC = 5.2%.

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved. 

(4.28)

53

The Future of Investment Management

In this simple case, the variances of r and g are almost exactly 1, so the
covariance and the correlation are effectively the same.37
We can now check out the fundamental law of active management. We
can calculate the information ratio directly on the basis of our calculations of
the casino’s expected return and its standard deviation. We can then compare
it to the fundamental law result, with a breadth of 1 for this scenario.
IR =

5.2%
= 0.052 = IC ⋅ BR .
99.9%

(4.29)

The information ratio is quite low, yet the information coefficient looks
good from the perspective of active management. The problem is that the
breadth is very low. It is not surprising that casinos do not encourage this
approach to roulette.
The analysis of the second, more standard scenario is somewhat similar.
In this case, though, we play the game 100,000 times over the course of the
year and assume each game involves 1/100,000 of the capital. The expected
return doesn’t change if we do this. The expected return is 5.2% for each
game n, so averaging over 100,000 games still gives us an expected return
of 5.2%:
N

 1
E{r } = ∑   ⋅ E{rn } ⇒ 5.2%.
 
n =1 N

(4.30)

The variance of return, however, is quite different. Now we calculate it as
follows:
2

 Var{rn } 
 1
Var{r } = ∑   ⋅ Var{rn } = 
⇒ (0.32%)2 .


 N 
n =1 N
N

(4.31)

The casino’s expected return is the same in both scenarios. However, the
casino clearly much prefers the second scenario from a reward-to-risk ratio
standpoint. In the first scenario, the casino has a 47.4% chance of losing
$2.5 million. In the second scenario, the casino could lose that much only if it
lost 100,000 games in a row, which is enormously unlikely. In fact, Equation
4.31 shows that the standard deviation of casino outcomes is only 0.32%.
The casino is unlikely to win more than 5.9% or win less than 4.5%. It has
To be more precise, we are analyzing a gamble on evens from the casino’s perspective. The
casino’s signal is +1 for odds. But the expected signal is zero because the gamble could have
been on odds, in which case the casino’s signal would be –1 (i.e., a bet on evens).
37

54

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved.

4. Seven Insights into Active Management
Exhibit 4.10.

Comparative Roulette Return Distributions

Probability Distribution
0.6
0.5

1 Bet

0.4
0.3
0.2
100,000 Bets

0.1
0
–150

–100

–50

0

Return (%)

50

100

150

effectively locked in winnings of around 5%. Exhibit 4.10 shows how the
return distribution has changed from one scenario to the other.38
How does the fundamental law do in this case? We can calculate the
information ratio directly and compare it to the fundamental law result with
a breadth of 100,000:
IR =

5.2%
= 16 = IC ⋅ BR .
0.32%

(4.32)

In this simple example, breadth works to reduce the variance of outcomes—
exactly what we expect from diversification. It doesn’t alter the expected return.
Its impact on the information ratio is mainly through the denominator.
Understanding the Transfer Coefficient. Now back to the third term
in the fundamental law, the transfer coefficient. It measures the correlation
between the return of a paper portfolio that optimally implements the manager’s views without regard to costs or constraints and the actual portfolio the
The graph is a bit misleading because of the very different scales involved in the two distributions. In fact, the area under each distribution is the same: 100%.
38

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved. 

55

The Future of Investment Management

manager is running. The information ratio of the paper portfolio is IC ⋅ BR .
The information ratio of the actual portfolio—taking into account constraints,
costs, and possibly even poor implementation—is typically much lower.
To see where the transfer coefficient arises, go back to Equation 4.2,
which describes the optimal portfolio, Q:
α − 2λV ⋅ hQ = 0.

(4.33)

Portfolio Q is the optimal paper portfolio. Using this relationship, we can
calculate the forecast alpha and the information ratio of Portfolio Q:
αQ = hTQ ⋅ α ⇒ 2λhTQ ⋅ V ⋅ hQ = 2λωQ2 .

IRQ = 2λωQ .

(4.34)

But the manager holds Portfolio P, not Portfolio Q. We can do a similar
calculation, starting again with Equation 4.33:
α P = hTP ⋅ α ⇒ 2λhTP ⋅ V ⋅ hQ = 2λω P ⋅ωQ ⋅ρPQ .

IR p = 2λωQ ⋅ρPQ = IRQ ⋅ρPQ .

(4.35)

The information ratio of any Portfolio P is the information ratio of
Portfolio Q times the correlation of P and Q. Clarke, de Silva, and Thorley
(2002) called that correlation the transfer coefficient.
Here are some examples of transfer coefficients to provide insight into
its magnitude. Let’s assume for these first two examples that residual returns
are uncorrelated (the Sharpe 1963 assumption), residual risks are the same
for every asset, and scores are normally distributed. If Portfolio P was equal
weighted, with long positions for all the positive alpha stocks and short positions for all the negative alpha stocks, it would have a transfer coefficient of
2
≈ 0.8. Roughly speaking, 80% of our information comes from the sign
π
of the alpha. Further, what if Portfolio P consists of Portfolio Q with, for
example, the 25% smallest positions removed? Exhibit 4.11 shows the general result.
Until you remove about 80% of the smallest positions, the impact on the
transfer coefficient is small. Insight 7 will go into much more detail on how
the long-only constraint affects the transfer coefficient. For now, I will just
note that the transfer coefficient can vary widely across different approaches
to investing. At the high end, long–short portfolios of low-transaction-cost
56

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved.

4. Seven Insights into Active Management
Exhibit 4.11. Transfer Coefficient as We Exclude Small Positions
Transfer Coefficient
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

Smallest Positions Excluded (%)

80

90

100

assets (such as futures contracts) can achieve transfer coefficients well above
0.9. But long-only portfolios with additional constraints and high levels of
residual risk can experience transfer coefficients well below 0.5.
Investment Examples. Now let’s consider four investment examples.
First, imagine a stock picker with an information coefficient of 0.05, a small
but reasonably impressive level of skill in the active equity management business. This manager follows 500 stocks per quarter, effectively taking 2,000
bets per year. The manager then builds a long-only portfolio with a transfer
coefficient of 0.35. The fundamental law implies an information ratio of 0.78
(0.05 ⋅ 2, 000 ⋅ 0.35), indicative of a top-quartile manager.
Second, consider a market timer who looks at fundamentals, such as
dividend yields and interest rates, and develops skillful new forecasts with
an information coefficient of 0.1 roughly once per quarter. This manager
runs a long-only portfolio with a transfer coefficient of 0.6. The fundamental
law implies an information ratio of 0.12 (0.1 ⋅ 4 ⋅ 0.6), much lower than our
stock picker with half the skill in forecasting returns. It is difficult to deliver
consistent performance through market timing. It is, of course, possible to
deliver significant performance in one quarter through market timing. That is
its appeal. But it’s hard to repeat that performance quarter after quarter. That
© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved. 

57

The Future of Investment Management

is why I stated at the beginning of the chapter that managers focus (or should
focus) more on forecasting residual returns than on the market’s return.
For the third example, consider the performance of a tactical asset allocation manager who switches between stocks, bonds, and cash. Assume that
this manager has a high level of skill for every bet, with an information coefficient of 0.1. This manager looks at broad macroeconomic trends and develops new views about once per quarter, making 12 independent bets per year
(quarterly views on the three asset classes). The manager runs a long-only
portfolio with a transfer coefficient of 0.5. In this case, the fundamental law
implies an information ratio of 0.17, a bit above the median for active managers. Compared with the stock picker, a higher level of skill per bet does not
necessarily translate into a higher information ratio. This is a bit better than
market timing, owing to slightly more diversification. Because of the influence of the fundamental law of active management, neither market timing
nor tactical asset allocation is a popular strategy anymore.
Finally, let’s imagine that our tactical asset allocation manager has made
these calculations and determined to improve the information ratio by converting the existing fund into a global macro hedge fund. This fund involves
similar analysis, which is now applied to asset classes globally and implemented in an unconstrained long–short portfolio. Let’s assume the manager
expands from forecasting the behavior of three asset classes quarterly to forecasting 25 asset classes quarterly and, in the process, lowers the average information coefficient to 0.08—still respectably high. By going to a long–short
structure and by mainly using futures contracts instead of physical investments, the transfer coefficient rises from 0.5 to 0.9. The resulting information
ratio rises to 0.72, which is close to the result for the stock-picking strategy.
The fundamental law of active management has several implications.
First, successful strategies require some winning combination of skill,
breadth, and efficiency. Skill is the hardest to obtain. Breadth (i.e., diversification) can be the easiest to obtain—for example, by following more stocks—
but it works only in combination with skill. We can increase efficiency by
eliminating constraints. When hiring managers, investors must understand
how they combine skill, breadth, and efficiency. This is one way the fundamental law of active management helps investors choose active managers. In
the examples, we saw that market timing and tactical asset allocation strategies had trouble putting together compelling combinations of skill, breadth,
and efficiency.
Note that, in spite of its mathematical nature, the fundamental law of
active management applies to all active managers, not just quantitative
managers.
58

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved.

4. Seven Insights into Active Management

In summary, information ratios, the key to active management, depend
on skill, diversification, and efficiency.

Insight 6. Data Mining Is Easy
Why is it that so many strategies look great in backtests and disappoint on
implementation? Backtesters always have 95% confidence in their results, so
why are investors disappointed far more than 5% of the time? It turns out to
be surprisingly easy to search through historical data and find patterns that
have no predictive power for the future.
Investment researchers have long used the term data mining pejoratively
for the unguided search for patterns in historical data. This approach in
general is not effective in finding useful signals for predicting asset returns.
Over the past decade or so, however, data mining has become a positive term
describing research into extremely large datasets, looking for patterns with
higher signal-to-noise ratios than typically observed in investing. Today, for
example, parents might be delighted to hear that their son wants to marry his
data miner girlfriend. Data mining does have a useful and important role in
fields with large amounts of data and reasonable signal-to-noise ratios. The
larger the amount of data, the lower the required signal-to-noise ratio. Still,
investment research often uses data mining as a derogatory term because many
of our datasets are not that big and our signal-to-noise ratios are typically low.
To understand why data mining is easy, we must first understand the statistics of coincidence. Let’s begin with some non-investment examples and
then move on to investment research.
Non-Investment Examples. In the mid-1980s, Evelyn Adams won the
New Jersey state lottery twice in four months. Newspapers put the odds of
that happening at 17 trillion to 1, an incredibly improbable event. Soon afterward, two Purdue University statisticians, Stephen M. Samuels and George
P. McCabe, Jr., showed that a double win in the lottery is not a particularly
improbable event.39 They estimated the odds against observing a double winner in four months at only 30 to 1. What explains the enormous discrepancy
in these two probabilities?
It turns out that the odds of Evelyn Adams (specifically her) winning the
lottery twice are in fact 17 trillion to 1. But millions of people play the lottery
every day. Thus, the odds of someone, somewhere, winning two lotteries in
four months are only 30 to 1. If it weren’t Evelyn Adams, it would have been
someone else. In fact, it has happened again since then.
39

Samuels and McCabe (1986), and also Diaconis and Mosteller (1989).

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved. 

59

The Future of Investment Management

Coincidences appear improbable only when viewed from a narrow perspective. When viewed from the correct (broad) perspective, coincidences are
not so improbable. Let’s consider another non-investment example: Norman
Bloom, arguably the world’s greatest data miner.40
Bloom died a few years ago in the midst of his quest to prove the existence
of God through baseball statistics and the Dow Jones Industrial Average.
He argued that “both instruments are in effect great laboratory experiments
wherein great amounts of recorded data are collected and published.” As but
one example of thousands of his analyses of baseball, he argued that it was
not a coincidence when the Kansas City Royals’ third baseman George Brett
hit his third home run in the third game of the playoffs to tie the score 3–3.
Rather, it proved the existence of God. In the investment arena, he argued
that it was not a coincidence that the Dow’s 13 crossings of the 1,000-point
line in 1976 mirrored the 13 colonies that united in 1776. He also pointed out
that the 12th crossing occurred on his birthday, deftly combining message
and messenger. He never took into account the enormous volume of data he
searched through—in fact, an entire New York Public Library’s worth—to
find these coincidences. His focus was narrow, not broad.
The importance of perspective to understanding the statistics of coincidence was perhaps best summarized by, of all people, the novelist Marcel
Proust (1982, p. 178)—who often showed keen mathematical intuition:
The number of pawns on the human chessboard being less than the number
of combinations that they are capable of forming, in a theater from which all
the people we know and might have expected to find are absent, there turns
up one whom we never imagined that we should see again and who appears
so opportunely that the coincidence seems to us providential, although, no
doubt, some other coincidence would have occurred in its stead had we not
been in that place but in some other, where other desires would have been
born and another old acquaintance forthcoming to help us satisfy them.

Investment Examples. Investment research involves exactly the same
statistics and the same issues of perspective. The typical investment data mining example involves t-statistics gathered from backtesting strategies. The
narrow perspective says, “After 19 false starts, this 20th investment strategy
finally works. It has a t-statistic of 2.”
But the broad perspective on this situation is quite different. In fact, given
20 informationless strategies, the probability of finding at least 1 with a t-statistic of 2 is 64%. The narrow perspective substantially inflates our confidence
40

For more on Norman Bloom, see Sagan (1977).

60

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved.

4. Seven Insights into Active Management

in the results. When viewed from the proper perspective, confidence in the
results falls accordingly.
Given that data mining is easy, how can we safeguard against it? Over
time, my team at BlackRock has developed a number of approaches that work
effectively for investment research.
To start, one should judge any new investment idea on the basis of
whether it is
•• sensible,
•• predictive,
•• consistent, and
•• additive.
The sensibility criterion forces us to consider why an idea might work—
and, relatedly, why the market doesn’t already understand it—before testing
it empirically. This criterion allows an empirical analysis to proceed only if we
have a reason to believe it might work. Although sensibility may sound overly
restrictive in a world of statistical learning and data-driven understanding,
three key issues lie behind its use: the amount of data, the signal-to-noise
ratio, and non-stationarity. Where we have plenty of data, high signal-tonoise ratios, and stationary processes, we can rely on statistical learning without ex ante sensibility. There are even areas of investing where we can relax
the sensibility criterion: notably, higher-frequency phenomena, such as shorthorizon trading signals. But overall, my team at BlackRock has found sensibility to be effective in leading toward valuable research directions.
The other three criteria concern the backtest results themselves. We obviously seek predictive signals—ideas that predict future returns as opposed to
those that contemporaneously help explain returns. Backtests probe a signal’s
ability to predict returns over historical data. Consistency ties directly to high
information ratios. We actually care about the consistency of our aggregate
forecast rather than the consistency of any one component signal. The additivity criterion judges whether this is a new idea or an old idea disguised as
new. Having been in this business for many years, I can say that sometimes
what we think of as new ideas are already contained in the existing aggregate
forecast.
Beyond these four criteria, ancillary testing of any new idea also helps
in determining its potential effectiveness. Our goal is to understand how the
idea affects investment returns and, hence, to develop non-return tests. For
example, is this an equity idea that predicts earnings surprise (the difference between newly reported earnings and analyst expected earnings) and
© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved. 

61

The Future of Investment Management

influences returns through that mechanism? The ancillary test can check
whether the signal predicts earnings surprise. This ancillary test provides a
second statistical test of the signal’s efficacy, increasing our statistical confidence in the result. Going forward, it can provide an early indication if the
signal stops working.
We also use the statistical techniques of out-of-sample testing and crossvalidation. Out-of-sample testing requires us to hold out part of our historical
data. We test and fit the signal on the in-sample data and then run a final test
with the out-of-sample data. The held-out sample might be the most recent
historical period, but it could also be a subset of the assets.
Cross-validation breaks the data into N periods and then tests and fits the
data N times, each time with one of those periods held out. Both approaches
limit overfitting to a particular sample of the data.
What Fraction of Positive Backtest Results Are True? I have
attempted to estimate the impact of this overall approach on the ability to
successfully identify effective signals, using a methodology proposed by John
Ioannidis in his provocative 2005 article on medical research, “Why Most
Published Research Results Are False.” Ioannidis’s analysis is top down. He
started by thinking about all the medical studies that have been done and
placing each experiment into a 2 × 2 table (see Exhibit 4.12). To fill out the
table, imagine a total of c studies. Ioannidis applied a measure of degree of
difficulty, Rpn, the ex ante expected ratio of positive results to negative results.
This measure shows, ex ante, how many studies are likely to be positive and
how many are likely to be negative. Is the research looking for fish in barrels
or needles in haystacks? If the researcher is considering 100 different studies and Rpn is 1:9, then she expects 10 studies to find a positive result and 90
studies to find a negative result.
Ioannidis then added to his analysis several important considerations:
•• f fp, the fraction of false positives caused by statistical noise

•• f fn, the fraction of false negatives caused by statistical noise

•• b, for bias (Researchers will present some fraction of negative results as
positive owing to bias. Statistical noise, bias, or both will lead true negative results to be presented as positive.)
•• N, for number of multiple tests (We have discussed this already—testing
multiple variants of the signal until we find a variant that works. This
increases false positives because the researcher reports a positive result
even if only one out of N tests show up positive.)
62

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved.

4. Seven Insights into Active Management
Exhibit 4.12.

Research Findings and True Relationships
True Relationships
Negative

Negative

Research Findings

Positive

Positive

Source: Ioannidis (2005).

After putting this all together, as shown in Exhibit 4.12, he then looked
at the sum of the top row—all the results that have tested positive—and asked
what fraction of those results actually are positive? This measure is the positive
predictive value (PPV), and it depends on all the variables introduced above.
(See the Technical Appendix at the end of this chapter for more details.)
Ioannidis (2005) showed that most published medical research has a PPV
of less than 50%—hence, the article’s title. He also described how research
findings are less likely to be true
•• the smaller the study;
•• the smaller the effect size;
•• the greater the flexibility in designs, definitions, and analyses;
•• the greater the financial interest; and
•• the hotter the field of study.
He stated that “finally, … before running an experiment, investigators
should consider what they believe the chances are that they are testing a true
© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved. 

63

The Future of Investment Management

rather than a non-true relationship” (p. 701). That sounds a lot like our criterion of sensibility.
Edward L. Glaeser (2008) covered some of the same ground as Ioannidis,
though his work focused on economic research and had less analytical structure. He provided more detail, in particular, on researcher bias caused by
incentives faced by assistant professors. He cautioned skepticism of methodological complexity, which offers researchers more degrees of freedom and
increases the cost of reproducing results. He also called for skepticism toward
analysts who produce and clean their own data, another opportunity for
increasing statistical significance.
Financial research isn’t the same as medical research. We are looking not
for truths of nature but, rather, for relationships we hope will work for some
period of time. We live in a non-stationary world and expect that most of our
investment ideas will eventually stop working as the market discovers them.
Still, we can use a variant of Exhibit 4.12, where the columns are not about
truth but, rather, are about adding value, or not, out of sample. (The Technical
Appendix at the end of this chapter provides more details.)
I have used this analysis to estimate the importance of the research criteria and ancillary testing to boosting the positive predictive value—the fraction of signals that pass the tests and work out of sample. Exhibit 4.13 shows
the results, along with specific values I chose for the key variables.
We start with scattershot data mining—searching for patterns in data
without any prior reason to believe they’re there (i.e., no ex ante sensibility)—
and run about 20 tests looking for the best results. The PPV is about 10%. In
my estimation, adding sensibility boosts the PPV to just under 50%. The full
approach described previously—with the four criteria plus ancillary testing—
raises the PPV to 75%. Although many of the inputs to the analysis are just
rough estimates, it is clear that this approach significantly affects the PPV.

Exhibit 4.13. Research Environment and Positive Predictive Value
Research Environment

f fp

f fn

Bias

N

Rpn

PPV

Scattershot data mining

0.05

0.01

0.1

20

0.1

10%

Sensibility

0.05

0.05

0.2

3

0.5

47

No SPCA* process

SPCA, ancillary testing

0.05

0.05

0.01

0.05

0.2
0.05

10

3

0.15
0.5

14

75

*SPCA stands for sensible, predictive, consistent, and additive.
Source: BlackRock.

64

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved.

4. Seven Insights into Active Management

Insight 7. Constraints and Costs Have a Surprisingly
Large Impact
The final insight is that constraints and costs can have a surprisingly substantial impact. To illustrate this point, I focus on the long-only constraint, one
of the most pervasive and impactful constraints. Most investing is long only.
Here, I show the impact of that constraint.
Conveniently, we have a tool to measure the impact of constraints and
costs: the transfer coefficient. Constraints and costs affect the efficiency of our
implementation, so the transfer coefficient quantifies the impact.
Imagine that we follow a universe of stocks and that our views of them
are roughly normally distributed. In the language of stock recommendations,
some are strong buys, some are strong sells, and the majority are closer to the
middle. Exhibit 4.14 shows the situation schematically.
Intuitively, the long-only constraint limits our ability to fully take advantage of the most negative information—that is, those assets to the left of the
blue dotted line in Exhibit 4.14. If that blue line is far to the left, we affect
only a few positions. As it moves toward the center, though, it affects more
and more assets. What influences the position of that blue line? A key driver
is the residual risk of the fund.
Exhibit 4.14.

Impact of the Long-Only Constraint

Number of Recommendations

Strong Sell

Sell

Hold

Buy

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved. 

Strong Buy

65

The Future of Investment Management

As we increase the fund’s residual risk, we take bigger overweights and
bigger underweights. As the underweights increase, they increasingly run
into the long-only constraint. We expect the impact of the long-only constraint to increase and the transfer coefficient to decrease as the residual risk
of the fund increases.
In fact, the impact of the constraint is bigger than this analysis implies. It
also affects assets with positive recommendations, because our overweights and
underweights need to balance. We can overweight an asset only if we underweight another asset. If we are limited in our ability to underweight, owing to
the long-only constraint, we will hence be limited in our ability to overweight.
Simplified Example. Consider this interesting, yet simple, example.
We start with an equal-weighted 1,000-stock benchmark. Each stock has a
0.1% weight in the benchmark. Assume that each stock has the same residual
risk, that residual returns are uncorrelated (the Sharpe 1963 assumption), and
we generate forecast alphas as IC ⋅ ω ⋅ z, with IC and w the same for every
stock and z generated from a normal distribution. We calculate optimal holdings for a long–short fund as well as for a long-only fund. Exhibit 4.15 shows
the optimal holdings of the two funds, displayed with the stocks sorted from
largest forecast alpha to smallest forecast alpha.
The long–short portfolio holdings look roughly symmetric, with roughly
the same amount long and short. The portfolio includes about 500 long positions and 500 short positions. The largest positive positions look similar to
the largest negative positions.
The long-only portfolio looks very different. We know the smallest possible
position is a 0.1% underweight—that is, a holding of zero in the portfolio—and
about 700 stocks have that position. Clearly, the positions of the negative-alpha
stocks look quite different for these two portfolios. Exhibit 4.15 also shows the
impact of the long-only constraint on positive positions. Just compare optimal
holdings in the two portfolios for the largest positive-alpha stocks. These are
notably smaller in the long-only portfolio. In fact, the long–short portfolio
turns out to be 202% long and 202% short, whereas the long-only portfolio is
only 73% overweight and 73% underweight.41 This exhibit provides graphic evidence that the long-only constraint also affects holdings for the most positive
alphas because of the constraint that longs and shorts must balance out.
A More Realistic Analysis. To estimate the impact of the long-only
constraint in more realistic portfolios, Grinold and I (2000) used a simulation
These numbers were calculated by summing the long positions and the overweights,
respectively.
41

66

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved.

4. Seven Insights into Active Management
Exhibit 4.15.

Long-Only and Long–Short Active Positions

Active Holding (%)
2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

Long–Short

0
Long Only
–0.5

–1.0

–1.5

–2.0

–2.5

0

200

400

600

Asset Rank

800

1,000

experiment. We started with a benchmark 500-stock portfolio. To use realistic asset weights, we first analyzed several popular cap-weighted equity
indexes, including the S&P 500 and the Russell 1000. Although these differ
somewhat, their asset weights are not far from lognormally distributed. So,
we used a lognormal distribution fit to those typical benchmarks.
With the benchmark set, we generated 900 sets of 500 alpha forecasts.
Each set of 500 alphas had an intrinsic information ratio of 1.5. We sampled
© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved. 

67

The Future of Investment Management

the alpha forecasts from a distribution uncorrelated with cap-weight. For each
set, we built optimal long–short and long-only portfolios of different residual
risk levels. We then calculated the forecast alpha and residual risk for each
portfolio. After doing that 900 times, we averaged the result for each risk level.
One reason we did multiple simulations is that although the underlying
distribution of alphas is uncorrelated with cap-weight, particular samples
of alphas might randomly end up correlated with cap-weight. If the alphas
were accidentally negatively correlated with cap-weight, such that the largercap stocks tended to have more negative alphas, the long-only constraint
would be a bit less binding, and vice versa. We generated 900 simulations
and then averaged over those accidental correlations, positive and negative.
Exhibit 4.16 displays the resulting efficient frontiers.
The long–short efficient frontier displays an information ratio of 1.5. For
example, we have an expected alpha of 6% when our residual risk is 4%, and
the efficient frontier is a straight line.
The long-only efficient frontier shows the increasing impact of the constraint with increasing residual risk. It is true that as we increase residual risk,
we increase forecast alpha. However, we receive less and less additional forecast alpha for each additional unit of residual risk.

Exhibit 4.16. Efficient Frontier
Forecast Residual Return (%)
8
7
Long–Short

6
5
4
3

Long Only

2
1
0

68

0

1

2

3

4

Forecast Residual Risk (%)

5

6

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved.

4. Seven Insights into Active Management
Exhibit 4.17. Transfer Coefficient
Transfer Coefficient
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

0

1

2

3

4

Forecast Residual Risk (%)

5

6

We can also see this effect by looking directly at the transfer coefficient as
a function of residual risk, as in Exhibit 4.17.
The transfer coefficient for each risk level is simply the ratio of the longonly information ratio to the long–short information ratio. The higher the
residual risk, the lower the transfer coefficient.
According to this fairly realistic simulation study, at 2% residual risk, the
long-only constraint reduces the information ratio by about 30%, and at 4.5%
residual risk, typical for US active equity mutual funds,42 the long-only constraint reduces the information ratio by about 50%.
Beyond the loss in information ratio, the long-only constraint also induces
a small size bias that increases with residual risk. We are more constrained in
underweighting small stocks than large stocks in cap-weighted benchmarks.
We can start with forecast alphas uncorrelated with size and build a long-only
portfolio with a bet on small stocks outperforming large stocks.
Constraints and costs—and the long-only constraint, in particular—can
significantly affect expected performance. We are better off running longonly portfolios at low residual risk and using long–short implementations if
we wish to run higher-residual-risk portfolios.
In the Chapter 5 section on fee compression, I discuss data showing that median active risk
levels for US large-cap mutual funds was 4.79% over the period from October 1997 through
September 2017.
42

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved. 

69

The Future of Investment Management

Summary
These seven insights into active management, viewed broadly, show that active
management isn’t easy and that the majority of attempts will fail. The information ratio is the critical statistic for investors and active managers. Successful
investors must find winning combinations of skill, breadth, and efficiency.

Technical Appendix
This appendix provides more-detailed analysis to estimate positive predictive
value.
We start by assuming we test c signals. The number c will drop out of the
analysis at the end, but it’s clarifying to keep it in for now. The variable Rpn
measures the ex ante ratio of positive results to negative results. It measures the
c ⋅ R pn
degree of difficulty of our research. We, therefore, expect that
are truly
R pn + 1
c
positive and
are truly negative. Of the results that are truly negative, ffp
R pn + 1
of them will test positive and (1 – ffp) of them will test negative. We can similarly
analyze what happens to the truly positive results, which lead to Exhibit 4A.1.
We can see from Exhibit 4A.1 that the positive predictive value is
PPV =

R pn ⋅ (1 − f fn )

R pn ⋅ (1 − f fn ) + f fp

.

(4.36)

As the ex ante probability increases and the false positives and negatives
decrease, it can approach 1. Of course, it can also fall far below 1.
It turns out that the ex ante ratio of positive results to negative results can
have a big impact on the positive predictive value. To see why that happens,
imagine that your doctor tests you for a rare disease; only 1 person out of
1,000 has this disease. The test is 99% accurate—that is, the fraction of false
positives is 1%—and assume there are no false negatives. The test comes back
positive. How likely is it that you have the disease? The answer is not 99% but
only about 1 out of 11. Equation 4.36 also leads to that answer.
What’s going on here? Out of 1,000 people, 1 is a true positive and 999
are true negatives. If we apply the 1% false positive rate to the 999 true negatives, we expect to see about 10 false positives. The group of people who will
test positive includes 1 true positive and 10 false positives. The probability of
having the disease after testing positive is about 1 out of 11.
We can now see why the ex ante ratio of positive results to negative results
can significantly affect our results. If we are testing many signals with low
70

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved.

4. Seven Insights into Active Management
Exhibit 4A.1.

Research Findings and True Relationships
True Relationships

Rpn

c

Rpn + 1

Negative

( 1 – ffn )

c

1
Rpn + 1

ffp

Negative

Research Findings

Positive

Positive

c

Rpn
Rpn + 1

Total True = c

ffn

Rpn
Rpn + 1

c

1

Rpn + 1

Total False = c

( 1 – ffp )

1
Rpn + 1

Source: Ioannidis (2005).

probabilities of being true, all those truly negative signals can generate many
false positives and even swamp the numbers of truly positive signals.
We can also embellish the prior analysis to include two additional effects:
bias and multiple testing. For bias, let b represent the fraction of truly negative signals presented as positive owing to bias. In the details of the analysis,
assume that truly negative results are presented as negative in the absence of
bias and statistical noise. In other words, statistical noise, bias, or both will
lead to negative results reported as positive.
As for multiple tests, they increase the probability of false positives.
Whereas before f fp measured the fraction of false positives, now 1 − (1 − f fp )N
measures this fraction. If N = 1, the outcome is the same as our prior result,
but the probability of false positives increases with each additional set of tests.
Putting this all together, we have Exhibit 4A.2.
We also update our formula for positive predictive value to account for
these embellishments:

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved. 

71

The Future of Investment Management
Exhibit 4A.2. Research Findings and True Relationships
True Relationships

Positive

Positive

Research Findings

c

Rpn

Rpn + 1

Negative

c

Negative

1 – (1 – b ) ffn

Rpn
Rpn + 1

N

(1 – b) ffn

Total True = c

N

Rpn
Rpn + 1

c

1
Rpn + 1

c

1 – (1 – b) (1 – ffp)

N

N
1
(1 – b) (1 – ffp)
Rpn + 1

Total False = c

1
Rpn + 1

Sources: Ioannidis (2005), BlackRock, and author.

PPV =

{

{

R pn ⋅ 1 − (1 − b ) ⋅ f fn 

R pn ⋅ 1 − (1 − b ) ⋅ f fn 

N

}

N

}

+ 1 − (1 − b ) ⋅ (1 − f fp ) 

N

.

(4.37)

Note that if we set b = 0 and N = 1, we end up with Equation 4.36.

Bibliography
Clarke, Roger, Harindra de Silva, and Steven Thorley. 2002. “Portfolio
Constraints and the Fundamental Law of Active Management.” Financial
Analysts Journal (September/October): 48–66.
Diaconis, Persi, and Frederick Mosteller. 1989. “Methods for Studying
Coincidences.” Journal of the American Statistical Association 84 (408,
Applications and Case Studies): 853–61.

72

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved.

4. Seven Insights into Active Management

Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French. 2010. “Luck versus Skill in the
Cross-Section of Mutual Fund Returns.” Journal of Finance 65 (5): 1915–47.
Glaeser, Edward L. 2008. “Researcher Incentives and Empirical Methods.”
In The Foundations of Positive and Normative Economics: A Hand Book, edited
by Andrew Caplin and Andrew Schotter. Oxford, UK: Oxford University
Press.
Grinold, Richard C. 1989. “The Fundamental Law of Active Management.”
Journal of Portfolio Management 15 (3): 30–37.
Grinold, Richard C., and Ronald N. Kahn. 2000. Active Portfolio Management,
2nd ed. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Grinold, Richard C., and Ronald N. Kahn. 2000. “The Efficiency Gains of
Long-Short Investing.” Financial Analysts Journal 56 (6): 40–53.
Grinold, Richard C., and Ronald N. Kahn. 2011. “Breadth, Skill, and Time.”
Journal of Portfolio Management (Fall): 18–28.
Ioannidis, John P. A. 2005. “Why Most Published Research Findings Are
False.” PLoS Medicine 2 (8): 696–701.
Kahn, Ronald N. 1999. “Seven Quantitative Insights into Active
Management.” Barra Newsletter from Barra and Investment Insights from
Barclays Global Investors.
Proust, Marcel. 1982. Remembrance of Things Past: The Guermantes Way, Cities
of the Plain, Vol. 2. New York: Vintage Books.
Sagan, Carl. 1977. “God and Norman Bloom.” American Scholar 46 (4):
460–6.
Samuels, Stephen M., and George P. McCabe, Jr. 1986. “More Lottery
Repeaters Are on the Way.” New York Times, letter to the editor (17 February).
Sharpe, William F. 1963. “A Simplified Model for Portfolio Analysis.”
Management Science 9 (2): 277–93.
Sharpe, William F. 1991. “The Arithmetic of Active Management.” Financial
Analysts Journal 47 (1): 7–9.
Sharpe, William F. 1992. “Asset Allocation: Management Style and
Performance Measurement.” Journal of Portfolio Management 18 (2): 7–19.

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved. 

73

5. S
 even Trends in Investment
Management
The trends that are shaping the 21st Century embody both promise and
peril.
—Klaus Schwab

Now that we have covered the modern history of investment management and have reviewed several insights about active management, we can
look forward to where investment management is heading. This chapter covers seven key trends that help forecast the future of investment management
over the next 5–10 years:
•• Active to passive
•• Increased competition
•• Changing market environments
•• Big data
•• Smart beta
•• Investing beyond returns
•• Fee compression
As I discuss these trends, I make sure to consider whether I expect them
to continue. In some cases, the future of investment management will depend
on whether a trend continues.

Trend 1. Active to Passive
As previously discussed, the first index fund launched in 1971, after developments in academic finance surprisingly supported the concept of passive
investing. Both the capital asset pricing model and the efficient market
hypothesis argued that active management was futile and that indexing was
the optimal approach to investing.
In the decades after those developments, however, subsequent work identified a number of reasons to believe that successful active management is
possible. I have already discussed behavioral finance, excess volatility, arbitrage pricing theory, and informational inefficiency. These four developments
provide arguments in favor of active management. Speaking personally, my
group at BlackRock—the Systematic Active Equity team—has a record of
74

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved.

5. Seven Trends in Investment Management

success in active management that has lasted for more than 30 years. For the
first 20 years, we depended significantly on risk premiums and the arbitrage
pricing theory, à la Ross (1976). Since then, we have mainly relied on informational inefficiency, à la Grossman–Stiglitz (1980)—processing publicly
available information faster than the market.
There are at least two additional reasons to believe in active management,
beyond these four arguments. First, most investors face constraints in their
investments. Perhaps they can only, or almost only, invest long-only. Perhaps
they can invest only in certain regions or markets. Constraints—as we have
seen—can significantly affect investor portfolios and limit market efficiency.
Second, sometimes large investors find themselves in trouble, needing to raise
significant capital quickly. This condition often arises when investors combine leverage with illiquid assets—for example, when Long-Term Capital
Management collapsed in 1998. Situations like that, which will continue to
occur but at uncertain intervals, provide opportunities for investors with the
available liquidity to take advantage of them. These opportunistic investments can enhance active returns but arise only sporadically. They can’t be the
primary strategy for an active manager.
Where are we now in the debate between active and index investing?
Exhibit 5.1 shows cumulative flows in US equity mutual funds and exchangetraded funds from 2008 through 2017.

Exhibit 5.1.

US Domestic Equity Flows ($ billions)

Flow ($ billions)
1,800

Index Domestic Equity Mutual Funds

1,500
1,200
900
600
300

Index Domestic Equity ETFs

0

–300
–600

Actively Managed Domestic Equity Mutual Funds

–900

–1,200

–1,500

08

09

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

Source: Investment Company Institute (2018).

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved. 

75

The Future of Investment Management
Exhibit 5.2. Global Exchange-Traded Product Assets, 2000–March 2018
US ($ billions)
6,000
5,000
4,000
3,000
2,000
1,000
0

00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 Mar/18
Equity

Fixed Income

Commodities and Others

Source: BlackRock Global ETP Landscape, Monthly Snapshot (March 2018).

For the past 10 years, we have seen steady flows out of active equity funds
and into equity index mutual funds and index ETFs. More than 50 years
after the development of the capital asset pricing model, index funds have
been gathering substantial assets, at the expense of active funds. Based on
fund flows, investors appear to now be heeding the arguments in favor of
indexing.
For some perspective, BlackRock estimated that as of year-end 2016,
actively managed assets totaled $55.8 trillion and indexed assets totaled
$14.4 trillion (in addition, $6.3 trillion was in cash).43 Even after a decade
of shifting out of active equity and into index equity, 79% of assets were still
actively managed. The fraction of equity assets that are actively managed
is lower than the fraction of fixed-income assets that are actively managed.
Ignoring ETFs, multi-asset products, and alternative investments, 72% of
equity investments were actively managed and 82% of fixed-income assets
were actively managed as of year-end 2016.
Exhibit 5.1 also testifies to a related trend—the enormous growth of the
ETF market. Exhibit 5.2 provides further evidence for how much the ETF
market has grown since 2000. As of March 2018, the global ETF market has
grown to $4.8 trillion.
The vast majority of ETFs are products that track third-party indexes—
that is, indexes developed by a party independent of the investment
manager—although many such indexes are not broad market indexes. These
products have some advantages over other fund structures. They offer continuous pricing and liquidity—investors can trade them throughout the day—
and they are more tax efficient than other fund structures.
43

BlackRock, “Global Industry Heat Map, Q4 2017,” p. 2.

76

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved.

5. Seven Trends in Investment Management

To help us understand these flows from active to index, we can look at
the track record of active management—a regular topic of academic study.
We have discussed arguments for indexing and arguments for why successful
active management might be possible. How have these played out over time?
In one often-cited study, Eugene Fama and Kenneth French (2010)
examined the performance of US equity mutual funds. I discussed this study
in Chapter 4, in the section on the arithmetic of active management. As we
will see, US equity mutual funds are often studied by academics, in part
owing to their long history and survivorship-bias-free database. Fama and
French showed that the average active manager underperformed by roughly
the average level of fees. To be specific, within the world of US equity mutual
funds, active managers have delivered roughly zero alpha on average before
fees over the 33-year period from 1984 through 2006. Their average alpha
after fees ranged from –81 bps per year to –113 bps per year, depending on
whether Fama and French controlled for one, three, or four factors.44 Those
econometric details don’t change the headline result. In a somewhat related
result, French (2008) additionally argued that US investors paid 67 bps in
aggregate for active management over the same period. That number appears
lower than the Fama–French (2010) result, but French measured it across all
investments—active and index—so we should expect a lower number.
As we know from the arithmetic of active management, we expect the
average active manager to underperform. The Fama–French (2010) result
seems a bit better than expected, because the average active manager underperformed only by average fees, not by average fees and trading costs. In any
event, though, the underperformance of the average active manager says little
about whether successful active management is possible.
To focus on that question, we need to look at persistence of performance.
Do winners repeat? Even if the average active manager underperforms, persistence of positive active returns year after year would provide evidence that
successful active management is possible.
There have been many academic studies of this question over a long period
of time. Joop Huij and Simon Lansdorp (2012) wrote one of the more recent
papers, and its bibliography includes many of the others.45 These studies vary
Controlling for one factor involves simply regressing fund returns against market returns
and examining the intercept (alpha). To control for three factors, Fama and French (2010)
added their small size (SMB) and value (HML) factors, as described in Fama and French
(1992). To control for four factors, they added Mark Carhart’s (1997) momentum factor.
45
Their paper is on the Social Science Research Network (ssrn.com), though not in a journal
yet. Academics post new papers on ssrn.com well before they are accepted and appear in
journals. This network has dramatically increased the speed of dissemination of new ideas.
An SSRN app, for easily accessing new papers from smartphones, even exists.
44

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved. 

77

The Future of Investment Management

by asset class, time period, and methodology—for example, whether they
control for fund style and how they do so.
Several of these studies show some evidence for persistence. This evidence
ranges from fairly weak in US equity mutual funds to fairly strong in private
equity.46 Regarding the evidence for persistence of performance in US equity
mutual funds, here is one simple question: If a mutual fund has above-median
performance in one period—such that it is in the top 50% of funds on the
basis of performance—what is the probability that it will have above-median
performance in the next period? If that probability is 50%, then active performance is as random as a coin toss. I’ve met many investors who assume
that the answer isn’t 100%—that persistence isn’t perfect—but that maybe it’s
only 75%. In fact, these studies on US equity mutual funds find probabilities
between 50% and 60% and discuss whether those numbers are statistically
significant.47 The data strongly support the standard warning that “past performance is no guarantee of future results.”
We can understand the trend of active to passive investing in part because
of the historical track record for active management. The average active manager underperforms. There is some evidence for persistence of performance
and, hence, some evidence that successful active management is possible. But
the evidence in favor of active management isn’t overwhelming. We are not
sure how much longer the trend from active to passive will continue, but at a
minimum, indexing is here to stay as a significant component of investment
management.

Trend 2. Increased Competition
Has active management become more competitive? Laurent Barras, Olivier
Scaillet, and Russ Wermers (2010) examined US equity mutual funds over
the 32-year period from 1975 through 2006. They classified each fund into
one of three categories:
•• Zero alpha: managers who have skill but only enough to cover their fees
•• Skilled: managers who deliver positive alpha to clients after fees and costs
•• Unskilled
By their estimate, roughly three-quarters of all managers are zero alpha.
Note that they took uncertainty into account when classifying managers into

46
47

See Steve Kaplan and Antoinette Schoar (2005) for the private equity analysis.
For example, see Kahn and Rudd (1995).

78

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved.

5. Seven Trends in Investment Management

these three categories. These managers don’t deliver exactly zero alpha after
fees, but their alpha is statistically indistinguishable from zero after fees.48
Even more interesting is that Barras et al. (2010) estimated that the fraction of skillful active managers has declined from about 15% at the beginning
of their sample period to only about 1% at the end of the period. These exact
numbers depend on their particular analysis. Without completely and uncritically accepting their exact results, they do seem to show that successful active
management has become more difficult. Stated differently, active management has become more competitive over time.
Let’s look at this phenomenon from another angle. As I showed in
Chapter 3, for instance, in the story told by Victor Niederhoffer, academic
finance effectively experienced a long ban on work in support of active
management. That ban lasted from the development of the efficient market
hypothesis through the eventual academic acceptance of behavioral finance.
As behavioral finance established itself, academics started investigating and
discovering market inefficiencies. What happens to those inefficiencies after
academics publish papers describing them to the world?
In an interesting paper, David McLean and Jeffrey Pontiff (2016) examined the performance of a large set of active investment ideas—that is, market
inefficiencies—in three periods: the period used in the published academic
study, an out-of-sample period (from the end of the study period to the publication date), and the post-publication period, when the results were available to all. Not surprisingly, much of the active performance disappeared after
publication, perhaps in part because some of the ideas were just statistical
flukes.
However, McLean and Pontiff (2016) attributed about one-third of the
decline in performance to “publication-informed trading.” To me, as an active
manager myself, this finding isn’t surprising. Not only are these academic
papers easily available on the Social Science Research Network, but research
groups at broker/dealers send out monthly emails listing the new academic
papers of most interest to active managers. Speaking as a manager focused on
processing publicly available information faster than the market, my team’s
next great idea is not going to come from SSRN.
At a more anecdotal level, my group at BlackRock has seen the same
decline described by McLean and Pontiff (2016). We test new ideas by
building a long–short characteristic portfolio every period. The characteristic
Barras et al. (2010) did take into account the multiple test environment: the fact that even if
1,000 funds had truly zero alpha after fees, 50 of them (5%) would appear to deliver significant alpha owing to random fluctuations—positive or negative—at the 95% confidence level,
if interpreted as 1,000 separate single tests.
48

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved. 

79

The Future of Investment Management

portfolio is long stocks with positive exposure to the idea and short stocks
with negative exposure, while minimizing all other risks. The performance of
the characteristic portfolio should be driven by the underlying idea, since we
have minimized all other exposures and risks.
Exhibit 5.3 shows the performance of three particular academic ideas
displayed as event studies, with t = 0 defined as the publication date. The first
two ideas concern quality of earnings, with one published in 1996 and the
other in 2001. The third idea, which appeared in 2008, uses information from
option markets to forecast stock returns. The first idea worked more often
than not for at least five years after publication. The second idea worked for
about two years after publication. The third idea never worked after publication. These are just anecdotal observations—we can’t extrapolate too much
on the basis of just three observations—but they are consistent with McLean
and Pontiff (2016). We discussed these observations with clients before the
McLean and Pontiff article appeared.
The changing regulatory environment has also increased competitiveness
by eliminating advantages of large investors over small investors. One key
development here was Regulation Fair Disclosure, or Reg FD, issued by the
US Securities and Exchange Commission in August 2000. This rule required
Exhibit 5.3. Idea Performance before and after Publication
Cumulative Returns to Characteristic Portfolio
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
–5

–3

–2

–1

0

1

2

3

4

5

Time from Publication Date (years)

Quality 1996

Quality 2001

6

7

8

Options 2008

Source: BlackRock.

80

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved.

5. Seven Trends in Investment Management

all publicly traded companies to release all material nonpublic information
to all investors at the same time. Previously, such information was selectively
released to large institutions first. For example, most companies did not invite
small investors to their quarterly earnings conference calls, possibly in part
because of technological challenges. The development of the internet and
webcasting tools helped facilitate broad access.
One result of Reg FD was that institutional investor meetings with company management became less informative. Companies are not allowed to
selectively disclose any material information. It is possible that investors can
learn valuable information in such meetings via body language or other subtle
and unintended clues, but a primary source of information for some investors
became less clear or reliable. The competitive edge held by large institutions
shrank. In the years since Reg FD, other regulatory efforts have aimed to
further erase competitive informational advantages held by large institutions,
such as access to information from experts and analysts who follow industries
and companies.
As with the first trend, we aren’t sure whether active management can
become even more competitive than it is today. We do expect it to remain
highly competitive.

Trend 3. Changing Market Environments
When I discussed the trend from active to index investing, I portrayed it as a
negative for active management. However, there is another side to this. From
the perspective of an active manager, the other side of any trade is increasingly likely to be an uninformed index fund—that is, a trader with no specific
knowledge or insight about the particular asset being traded. This fact potentially improves the opportunities for active managers: They are more likely to
be trading with uninformed investors.
That said, the overall trading environment has changed in many ways
over the past 20 years. Exhibit 5.4 shows trends in the average trade size
(from the consolidated tape of all trades of stocks listed on the NYSE) on
the right-hand axis and NYSE block share volume as a percentage of consolidated share volume on the left-hand axis.
Exhibit 5.4 clearly shows that today’s trading environment is very different from what it was in 2004. This exhibit shows the emergence of highfrequency trading. In principle, the other side of an active manager’s trade is
more likely than ever to be an index fund. However, the intermediary facilitating that trade is now a high-frequency trader.
The average trade size has declined from about 1,000 shares per trade to
about 200 shares per trade. Traders are breaking up large trades into multiple
© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved. 

81

The Future of Investment Management
Exhibit 5.4. The Changing Trading Environment
Volume (%)

Shares

35

1,200

30

1,000

25

800

20

600

15

400

10

200

5
0

04

05

06

07

08

09

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

0

NYSE Block % Consolidated Volume (left axis)
Consolidated Trade Size (right axis)

Note: Data cover stocks listed on the NYSE.
Sources: NYSE and BlackRock.

small trades. Consistent with this trend, block volume was about 30% of total
volume in 2004 but only 10% in 2018. The 10% figure is a bit misleading,
however, because we are tracking NYSE block volume over consolidated
volume. The NYSE’s volume has decreased from about 80% of consolidated
volume to only about 20% over this period, but NYSE volume still dominates the opening and closing auction volumes that are included in the block
trade numbers. Given the increasing popularity of market-on-close orders—
especially from index-tracking funds—a ballpark estimate of current block
share volume as a percentage of total share volume is about 15%–18%, still
much lower than in 2004.49
To summarize, Exhibit 5.4 shows that broker/dealers, who used to be
the main source of liquidity, have been replaced by high-frequency traders
providing liquidity. The broker/dealers facilitated block trading, and they are
decreasingly prevalent. To try to limit the price impact of trading with highfrequency traders, investors are breaking up large trades into smaller ones, in
part to try to appear to be uninformed small investors.
The trading environment is very different from what it was 20 years ago.
I’m not predicting it will change even further, just noting that investors need
to adapt to what has already happened.
Thanks to Hubert De Jesus, global head of market structure and electronic trading at
BlackRock, for compiling and analyzing these data.
49

82

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved.

5. Seven Trends in Investment Management

Trend 4. Big Data
So far, I have mainly discussed negative trends for active management.
However, this fourth trend—the explosion of available data, also known as
big data—is definitely positive. In 1985, my group launched its first fund, a
US equity fund that attempted to outperform the S&P 500 by overweighting
value stocks, momentum stocks, and small stocks. We measured these using,
respectively, book-to-price ratios, returns over the prior year, and market capitalization. Our fund’s sources of alpha were broadly in line with the arbitrage
pricing theory of Stephen Ross (1976). In 1985, our edge was being able to
access and process book-to-price ratios for every stock in the S&P 500 and
then to optimally blend expected returns based on those characteristics while
controlling risk. Few investment firms at that time had all those capabilities. Today, standard financial data are available to everyone with an internet
connection—billions of people—although, of course, successfully investing
by using those data still requires training and skill.
Beyond financial data, we have seen an explosion in data availability so
vast that access is no longer sufficient: The edge now lies in identifying which
data are useful and in analyzing and effectively processing them. We commonly refer to this data explosion as “big data.” The big data explosion has
received a huge amount of press coverage over the past decade. The following
are a few magazine cover stories on the topic:
•• Nature: “Big Data: Science in the Petabyte Era,” September 2008
•• The Economist: “The Data Deluge,” 27 February 2010
•• Science: “Dealing with Data,” 11 February 2011
•• Harvard Business Review: “Getting Control of Big Data,” October 2012
•• Foreign Affairs: “The Rise of Big Data,” May/June 2013
•• Der Spiegel: “Living by the Numbers: Big Data Knows What Your Future
Holds,” 18 May 2013
•• The Economist: “The World’s Most Valuable Resource: Data and the New
Rules of Competition,” 6 May 2017
This list doesn’t even include technology magazines. Big data is a big
mainstream story, and it has been for 10 years.
What does the term “big data” mean? First, it means different things to
different people. Google’s definition of big data is probably orders of magnitude greater than that of even the most data-focused investment firms.
Second, and perhaps most important from our perspective, the data of big
© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved. 

83

The Future of Investment Management

data are unstructured. Financial reporting data are very structured; we consume them in highly structured datasets provided by Standard & Poor’s
Compustat, Thompson Reuters Worldscope, and other vendors. For example,
Item 36 in the Compustat annual industrial database refers to “retained earnings.” The point is that traditionally we could think of fundamental data as
existing in a large spreadsheet. Big data not only require much bigger spreadsheets but also don’t easily fit into a spreadsheet structure.
Imagine, for example, looking at the text of analyst reports on individual
stocks. One common statistic for machine analysis of text is the frequency of
usage of particular words and phrases. How often does the word “Microsoft”
appear in analyst reports? The answer is pretty often in reports on Microsoft,
somewhat often in analyst reports on other technology companies, and not at
all often in reports on other companies. If we put together a spreadsheet with
a row for each analyst report and columns for various features, the column
labeled “Microsoft” would consist mainly of zeros. The spreadsheet would
also need an incredibly large number of columns to handle all potentially
interesting names and phrases. Both characteristics make unstructured data
awkward to store in a spreadsheet structure.
What types of big data potentially provide useful information for active
management? Let’s examine five general categories: text, search, social media,
images, and video.
For a profession that has often focused particularly on numbers, much
more of the daily inflow arrives in the form of text. Analysts write reports
on individual stocks and describe their business, including its strengths and
weaknesses, competitors, potential threats, and the outlook for the future.
They also forecast earnings and provide a recommendation, from “strong buy”
to “strong sell.” Fundamental investors can read through entire reports and
consider the implications for stocks they own or are considering purchasing.
Quantitative investors, such as my team, who look to analyze every stock in
their investment universe in the interest of breadth, have traditionally been
able to use only analyst information that arrives in the form of numbers—the
earnings forecasts and the recommendations, which were easy to convert to a
numerical scale. We ignored most of the document. Now, we can process and
interpret the entire analyst report and, for example, understand more about
the analyst’s sentiment, as well as the nuances around the earnings forecast.
Analyst reports are unstructured in that each analyst writes his own view
of a company without trying to fit into any industry-wide template. As a further complication, analyst reports include legal disclaimers. Although these
are easy for humans to identify, they represent a bigger challenge for computers. Sometimes they appear at the beginning of a document, sometimes at
84

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved.

5. Seven Trends in Investment Management

the end, and sometimes somewhere in between. For sentiment analysis, it’s
important to distinguish the disclaimer because its sentiment is consistently
negative, independent of the analyst’s view of the stock.
As of today, an MBA student would do a better job than a computer
would do at understanding any one particular analyst report. The computer’s
edge, though, is in reading the roughly 5,000 analyst reports generated globally every day and analyzing them consistently. And in a few years, computers will beat the MBA student at understanding even a single analyst report.
Text analysis, or natural language processing, is a very active research area
in computer science. Big data in the form of unstructured text is already a
significant input for many quantitative investors.
There are some obvious challenges with text analysis. Text can appear
in many different languages. Ultimately, we need to be able to analyze text
across those languages. Text can also be ambiguous, especially to a computer.
Natural language processing research is working to handle these various
challenges.
The second big data category of interest to investors is internet search
activity. As the internet has become increasingly ubiquitous, people have
come to search for information about everything. For example, Google, with
mixed success, has used geo-tagged searches about flu symptoms and remedies to monitor in real time the severity of the flu season.50 For investors,
one example of interesting search activity relates to people researching online
before making large purchases of items such as cars and refrigerators. Thus,
internet search activity can help us predict sales. Investors have long been
predicting future sales, so monitoring internet search activity provides us
with new data to improve that effort.
The third big data category of interest to investors is social media: Twitter,
Facebook, LinkedIn, and so forth. Social media are varied, as are the potential uses of social media data. Such websites as LinkedIn include data on who
works for which companies, who is leaving, and who are the new hires. We
can estimate employee sentiment by employee movements. We can estimate
whether labor costs are increasing or decreasing on the basis of the number,
level, and quality of the new hires and departures. Once again, employee sentiment and labor costs are of long-standing interest to investors. Social media
simply represent new sources of data to help predict those quantities.
The fourth and fifth categories are images and video. Investors currently
make less use of these categories than the other three, but this will change
over the next few years, especially as an increasingly large fraction of all data
50

Ginsberg, Mohebbi, Patel, Brammer, Smolinski, and Brilliant (2009); Butler (2013).

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved. 

85

The Future of Investment Management

will be image and video data. Fundamental investors currently try to judge
body language in in-person meetings with senior management. (This is an
important activity in the post-Reg FD era.) Computers can analyze videos
of senior management presentations for the same purpose and will be able to
analyze all such presentations across the entire investment universe.
Big data represents a huge positive trend for active management, particularly for active managers who embrace the opportunities presented by
this development. A closely related advancement, machine learning/artificial
intelligence, provides the tools to fully access and analyze this large amount of
unstructured data. To gain the benefits of this trend, active managers will need
to hire people with skills in these areas—computer scientists, statisticians, data
scientists, and applied mathematicians. These people are different from those
active managers have typically hired, and they bring different skills.
We are still in the early stages of this trend, in spite of 10 years of magazine cover stories. Increasing amounts of data are becoming available every
month, and computer scientists are actively advancing new technologies to
analyze these data. A Google search will identify many articles that describe
the recent explosive growth in data and that forecast even more growth. To
provide specific evidence of this general trend, consider two examples involving demand growth. First, a 2017 report from Burning Glass, IBM, and the
Business-Higher Education Forum noted that there were 2,350,000 data science and analytics job openings posted in 2015, forecasted to grow 15% by
2020. The authors expect demand for data scientists and data engineers to
grow even faster, by 39%.
As a second example, consider the growth in attendance at the annual
Neural Information Processing Systems conference, which is now the world’s
largest artificial intelligence/machine learning conference. After starting in
1987 with 600 attendees, attendance in recent years has grown from about
1,200 in 2010 to 2,000 in 2013, 5,500 in 2016, and 8,000 in 2017. Industry
sponsorship of the conference—a measure of industry interest in research in
this area and interest in recruiting people working in this field—grew from
64 sponsors donating $840,000 in 2016 to 84 sponsors donating $1,760,000
in 2017. Demand and interest in big data and machine learning appear poised
to continue to grow for the foreseeable future.

Trend 5. Smart Beta
The next trend in investing is smart beta or factor investing. Smart beta products are active products with some of the benefits of index products. They
are active in that the goal is to outperform the market. They are transparent
and rule based, like indexing, with fees between those of active and index
86

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved.

5. Seven Trends in Investment Management

products. The nomenclature is not yet set in stone, but currently “smart beta”
usually refers to long-only products based on third-party indexes, whereas
“factor investing” usually refers to long–short products or long-only products
not based on third-party indexes.
Smart beta/factor products provide exposures to broad and persistent
factors that have long been a part of active management. For equities, these
include small size, value, momentum, quality, and low volatility. For fixed
income, the factors include duration and credit. These factors have generated
investor interest because they have performed well historically. Beyond that,
there are reasons to believe they will continue to outperform in the future.
Some of these factors are risk factors, which have associated expected risk premiums. Small size, value, duration, and credit fall into this category. Some of
these factors exploit behavioral anomalies and have positive expected returns
for that reason. Momentum and quality, and possibly also value, are examples.
Finally, some of these factors exploit structural impediments, such as typical
investor constraints. The typical constraint on leverage seems to underlie the
performance of the low-volatility factor. Seeking high returns without using
leverage, investors choose high-volatility stocks and overpay for them.
Factor investing is not new. It goes right back to the arbitrage pricing
theory proposed by Stephen Ross in 1976. The ideas underlying these factors go back even further. Value investing, for example, goes back at least to
Graham and Dodd in the 1930s and the Dutch investment trusts of the late
1700s, if not even further.
Smart beta/factor products have been rapidly growing over the past several years. According to Jennifer Thompson (2017) of the Financial Times,
smart beta funds surpassed $1 trillion in assets as of mid-December 2017.
Smart beta/factor products are not without controversy. They are disrupting active management and threaten indexing, with their promise of extra
return while retaining the low cost and transparency of indexing. Referring
to an early smart beta product, which predated the term “smart beta,” John
Bogle, the founder of Vanguard and a leading proponent of broad market
indexing, said that “fundamental indexing is witchcraft” in an interview with
Christine Benz of Morningstar in 2008.
Smart beta/factor investing is more than just a new product; it is a disruptive innovation for active management, as described in Kahn and Lemmon
(2016). It’s odd to call it an innovation at all. As we have seen, these ideas
have been around for decades. But it isn’t an investment innovation, it’s a
product innovation. Smart beta/factor investing takes important components
of successful active management, carves them out, and sells them for fees
below active fees. That’s the disruptive innovation.
© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved. 

87

The Future of Investment Management

These smart beta factors are already part of investment management.
Exhibit 5.5 shows a decomposition of investment returns.
We first decompose investment returns into the cap-weighted index
benchmark return and the active return.51 This decomposition requires nothing more than subtraction. The active return is simply the total investment
return minus the benchmark return:
δ P (t ) ≡ rP (t ) − rB (t ).

(5.1)

This decomposition is standard and easy to do.
The next level of decomposition requires just a bit more work. I decompose the active return into two pieces:
•• Active return due to static exposures to smart beta factors
•• Pure alpha return
Exhibit 5.5. Decomposition of Investment Returns

Investment Return

Cap-Weighted
Index
Benchmark Return

Active Return

Return from
Average (static)
Exposures to Smart
Betas

“Pure Alpha”
Return

Bottom-Up Security
Selection (beyond
smart beta)

Top-Down Macro,
Country, Industry
Selection (beyond
smart beta)

Smart Beta Timimg

For simplicity, here I focus on long-only investment products. The analysis applies equally
well to long–short investing, although in that case the benchmark is typically cash rather
than a cap-weighted index.
51

88

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved.

5. Seven Trends in Investment Management

This decomposition requires a time-series regression of active returns
against returns to J smart beta factors:
J

δ P (t ) = ∑ β j ⋅ b j (t ) + uP (t ).
j =1

(5.2)

For an equity strategy, one might use the five standard smart beta factors:
small size, value, momentum, quality, and low volatility. In that case, J = 5. Note
that although these five factors are fairly standard, their exact definitions are not
standard. Different people use different, though usually correlated, definitions.
Equation 5.2 provides exactly the decomposition shown in Exhibit 5.5.
The {bj} estimates are all static exposures—that is, they do not vary over time.
What we call “pure alpha” in this decomposition is actually the residual in
Equation 5.2: the part of the active return that static exposures to smart beta
factors cannot explain.
I further decompose the pure alpha return into the general categories
shown in Exhibit 5.5:
•• Bottom-up security selection, beyond smart beta
•• Top-down macro, country, and industry selection, beyond smart beta
•• Smart beta timing (i.e., non-static exposures to smart beta factors)
We can easily see how to apply this decomposition to any investment
product given the product benchmark and a set of smart beta factor returns.
Moreover, we can apply it to several standard categories of investments, as
shown in Exhibits 5.6, 5.7, and 5.8.
Exhibit 5.6 shows that index fund returns all come from the cap-weighted
index benchmark return. That makes sense, because index funds aim to
deliver zero active return.
Exhibit 5.7 shows that smart beta products deliver the cap-weighted
index benchmark return plus the active return achievable through static exposures to smart beta factors. These products deliver smart beta active returns
but not pure alpha returns.
Exhibit 5.8 shows that active management in principle can deliver returns
from all these components: the benchmark, smart beta factors, and pure alpha.
As it turns out, active managers vary in how much of each component
they attempt to deliver. Exhibit 5.9 shows the results of the empirical analysis
in Kahn and Lemmon (2016) of all the active international equity managers
in the eVestment database with data available for the three-year period from
April 2011 through March 2014.
© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved. 

89

The Future of Investment Management
Exhibit 5.6. Index Fund Decomposition

Index
Funds

Investment Return

Cap-Weighted
Index
Benchmark Return

Active Return

Return from
Average (static)
Exposures to Smart
Betas

“Pure Alpha”
Return

Bottom-Up Security
Selection (beyond
smart beta)

Top-Down Macro,
Country, Industry
Selection (beyond
smart beta)

Smart Beta Timimg

Exhibit 5.7. Smart Beta Fund Decomposition

Investment Return

Cap-Weighted
Index
Benchmark Return

Smart
Beta

90

Active Return

Return from
Average (static)
Exposures to Smart
Betas

“Pure Alpha”
Return

Bottom-Up Security
Selection (beyond
smart beta)

Top-Down Macro,
Country, Industry
Selection (beyond
smart beta)

Smart Beta Timimg

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved.

5. Seven Trends in Investment Management
Exhibit 5.8.

Active Fund Decomposition

Investment Return

Cap-Weighted
Index
Benchmark Return

Active
Management

Exhibit 5.9.

Active Return

Return from
Average (static)
Exposures to Smart
Betas

“Pure Alpha”
Return

Bottom-Up Security
Selection (beyond
smart beta)

Top-Down Macro,
Country, Industry
Selection (beyond
smart beta)

Smart Beta Timimg

Distribution of Smart Beta Delivered by Active Managers

Percent
25
20
15
10
5
0

5

10

20

30

40

50

60

Active Risk Budget Explained by Factors (%)

70

More

Note: 138 international equity managers; mean equals 35%.
Source: Kahn and Lemmon (2015).

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved. 

91

The Future of Investment Management

In this case, we regressed the active returns for each of the 138 managers against the Fama–French–Carhart four-factor (market, small size, value,
and momentum) model. Exhibit 5.9 shows the distribution of the fraction of
active risk represented by those four factors.52 The distribution is clearly quite
broad. On the one hand, there are some active managers—about 25%—who
mainly deliver pure alpha. Smart beta factors represent 20% or less of their
active risk. On the other hand, another 25% of the managers mainly deliver
smart beta, which represents 60% or more of their active risk. This particular
example—using international active equity managers and the international
Fama–French–Carhart factors—may underestimate the fraction of active risk
in smart beta factors, for example, for US equity managers or the managers
in just one country. The international factors may explain less risk overall in a
multinational setting.
Nothing is wrong with an active manager delivering smart beta. Investors
just need to understand what they are buying and pay a fair price for it.
Investors shouldn’t pay active fees for smart beta. Exhibit 5.10 shows fee levels as a function of the fraction of active risk in smart beta factors.
The products with the highest fraction of smart beta do seem to be charging reasonable fees, at least at the time of analysis. Exhibit 5.10 highlights the
active funds most likely to face disruption. These funds deliver a significant
amount of smart beta but charge active fees. I return to the issue of fees in the
Trend 7 section.
Smart beta has long been a part of active management, even if some
active managers rely very little on it. It turns out that smart beta has also
been a significant component of successful active management. Eduard Van
Gelderen and Joop Huij (2014) looked at US equity mutual fund performance
over the 21-year period from 1990 through 2010. They first calculated fund
alphas by regressing fund returns against the CRSP value-weighted index to
represent the market. After they eliminated funds with an R 2 less than 60%
and funds with less than 36 months of consecutive monthly returns, their
study covered 4,026 funds.
Van Gelderen and Huij (2014) separately regressed returns for each of those
funds against the larger Fama–French–Carhart set of six factors to determine
static exposures to small cap, value, momentum, low volatility (specifically low
market beta), short reversal, and long reversal. They classified funds as using
particular factors if their regression coefficients were “economically significant,”
which they characterized as being larger than 0.25, except for low market beta,
The fraction of active risk (active variance to be precise) for each fund equals the R 2 statistic
from regressing the fund’s active returns against the Fama-French-Carhart factor returns.
52

92

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved.

5. Seven Trends in Investment Management
Exhibit 5.10.

Fees vs. Fraction of Smart Beta Delivered

Fee (%)
1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

R2
Predicted Fee

Fee

Source: Kahn and Lemmon (2016).

which they characterized as being below 0.8.53 Finally, they looked at the average alpha by classification. Exhibit 5.11 displays their results.
If a fund had an economically significant exposure to small cap or value,
its probability of positive alpha significantly exceeded 50%. For funds with
no economically significant exposures to any smart beta factors, only 20%
delivered positive alpha. Historically, smart beta significantly contributed to
successful active management.
What about the pure alpha component of active return? As we have seen
from the decomposition of active returns, only active managers can deliver
pure alpha. Investors need all the returns they can get—whether from smart
beta or pure alpha. Delivering pure alpha returns must be a key focus of active
managers going forward.
How can active managers deliver pure alpha? Early in this chapter, I discussed various reasons to believe successful active management is possible.
Excess volatility didn’t point to any specific strategies. The arbitrage pricing
They discussed several different methods of defining significant exposures. Their results
were not very dependent on the choice of method.
53

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved. 

93

The Future of Investment Management
Exhibit 5.11.

Smart Beta and Successful Active Management

Economically Significant
Factor Exposure

Fraction with
Positive Alpha

None

20%

Small cap

61

Low beta

47

Value

66

Momentum

37

Short reversal

4

Long reversal

32

Source: Van Gelderen and Huij (2014).

theory underlies smart beta factors. Behavioral finance arguably also underlies some smart beta factors, although it could be a source of pure alpha ideas
as well. Investor constraints underlie at least the low-volatility smart beta factor, although they could also lead to pure alpha ideas. Opportunistic trading
provides pure alpha but only episodically. The clearest and most promising
sources of pure alpha are ideas that involve informational inefficiencies—
processing publicly available information faster than the market. If smart beta
factors are broad and persistent, pure alpha returns come from more narrow
and transient ideas. This is the area where big data and machine learning can
significantly contribute.
Success in pure alpha will require strong research capabilities because
many pure alpha ideas will last only until the market understands them.
Continuous generation of new ideas is critical for long-term success. Success
in pure alpha will also require financial engineering skills to hedge out smart
beta exposures. Of course, the fundamental law still applies. We need some
winning combination of skill, breadth, and efficiency.
I do expect continued investment flows into smart beta/factor products.
So far, the growth in smart beta/factor products has mainly been an equity
story. Fixed-income smart beta/factor products are still in the early stages
of growth. As noted in FTSE Russell Insights (June 2017, p. 1), reporting
on their global smart beta survey of institutional asset owners, “The trend
observed over the past three years of increasing global growth and adoption
of smart beta indexes continues in 2017 … It is clearly not a fad, but now
widely recognized as a meaningful set of new tools.”

94

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved.

5. Seven Trends in Investment Management

Trend 6. Investing Beyond Returns
In tracing investment management from its early history through its intellectual advances in the 20th century and even its current trends, the goal of
investment management has always been to deliver returns while controlling
risk. Stated more technically, the utility function of investing has included
only terms involving expected return and risk.
Although this focus has seemed natural in the context of investment
management, it involves a level of precision beyond the economic definition
we learned in Econ 101. Economists define utility as a measure of usefulness
or satisfaction associated with a good or service, something we can’t measure
objectively. Financial economists and investment managers, however, have
long focused solely on return and risk. This approach has been very fruitful:
Look at all the intellectual advances in this field I have discussed. But it may
not fully capture what satisfies investors.
In the 1950s and 1960s, labor union pension plans invested in affordable housing projects and health facilities, in part to further social goals.
This trend was followed in the 1970s with a broad social movement aimed
at forcing university endowments to divest from companies that did business
in apartheid-era South Africa, where the majority of the population lived in
conditions antithetical to the ideals of those universities. I believe this was
the first broad movement aimed at divestiture, although I may be influenced by the daily protests I saw on this topic when I was an undergraduate
at Princeton University. As Andrew Rudd commented in his 1979 Journal
of Portfolio Management article, “Many serious ethical questions are raised
by these actions; for instance, to what degree and in which form should the
trustees be accountable to the conflicting interests of the fund’s beneficiaries.”
Should university endowments single-mindedly focus on delivering returns,
or should they consider other moral and ethical considerations?
The debate over South Africa divestiture pitted return objectives against
moral and ethical considerations. The return implications of divestiture
appeared significant; they involved 116 companies in the S&P 500, concentrated in a few industries, including business machines, oil, pharmaceuticals, and autos.54 Excluding more than 100 companies out of the 500 in
the S&P 500 and substantially excluding certain large industries seems like
it would significantly impair investing in US large-cap stocks. Rudd (1979)
examined how well a fund could track the S&P 500 after excluding those
See Rudd (1979) for further details. He used a list of US companies doing business in South
Africa compiled by the Investor Responsibility Research Center.
54

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved. 

95

The Future of Investment Management

116 stocks and found he could reduce the active risk to 2.21%, most of which
was stock-specific risk.
The South Africa divestiture movement did have an effect. Hampshire
College divested in 1977, and by 1988, 155 college endowments had divested.
Divestiture was only one element in raising awareness about the battle against
apartheid; the global fallout from the end of the Cold War was the much
more direct cause of its actual downfall. The South African government
freed Nelson Mandela and other political prisoners in 1990 and dismantled
apartheid.
Following the South Africa divestiture movement, socially responsible
investing started becoming increasingly popular, with a variety of additional
criteria for exclusion, including sin stocks (liquor, tobacco, war-related stocks),
nuclear power stocks, and nonunion company stocks (e.g., textile company
J.P. Stevens). Some criteria for inclusion also appeared—for example, including stocks of companies recognized for having environmentally sound policies and good customer and employee relations. Rudd (1981) and Hamilton,
Jo, and Statman (1993) provided good overviews.
The tobacco divestiture effort of the 1990s is particularly interesting,
because it attempted to shift the discussion from a moral/ethical choice to
a decision solely about return and risk. I discussed this issue in detail in my
1997 article with Claes Lekander and Tom Leimkuhler.55 Against a backdrop
of increasing numbers of lawsuits against tobacco companies, including state
and city lawsuits to recover tobacco-related health care expenses, divestiture
advocates used some of the following arguments:
•• Maryland state comptroller Louis L. Goldstein stated he was “concerned
about the potentially negative long-term impact of litigation on the
investment value of U.S. tobacco companies” (p. 63).
•• New York State officials claimed they restricted tobacco stock holdings
strictly for financial reasons.
•• A San Francisco resolution stated the “tobacco stocks can no longer be
justified as a prudent investment” (p. 63).
These may be useful arguments for pension plan sponsors trying to balance
moral and ethical views with the requirement of investment to meet obligations
to beneficiaries. Unfortunately, these investment-based arguments do not hold
up to scrutiny. Declaring that tobacco stocks have negative expected returns on
the basis of widely publicized lawsuits sounds like active management by public
55

Kahn, Lekander, and Leimkuhler (1997).

96

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved.

5. Seven Trends in Investment Management

officials. Why should that work? Active management can work if it is based on
information the market doesn’t know or appreciate, but the lawsuits at that time
were the most salient facts known about these stocks. I do remember talking to
one public pension plan investor who said their informational advantage was in
assessing the probability of success of those lawsuits, but he didn’t think that
was a very compelling argument. It would certainly be reasonable, at least to
me, for pension plans to not invest in tobacco because it was killing the beneficiaries, but that wasn’t the argument at that time.
Since then, interest in additional criteria for investing has grown in both
size and sophistication. Exclusionary screens on tobacco, weapons, and fossil
fuels are still popular. On the more sophisticated front, we have seen growth
in investing based on environmental, social, and governance (ESG) factors as
well as the emergence of impact investing, which targets measurable outcomes
across such social and environmental goals as alternative energy, health, and
inclusion. Sometimes this general approach is referred to as sustainable investing. One measure of the increasing sophistication is the movement beyond
simple exclusionary rules for portfolio construction. Investors can now measure companies on a continuous scale from good to bad along many dimensions and size their portfolio positions accordingly.
For some sustainable investors, this effort is all or mainly about return
and risk—at least over the long term. It may bear some similarity to those
state pension plans I discussed that excluded tobacco stocks. For other investors, it goes beyond return and risk to additional components of their utility. I
consider sustainable investing expansively as investing beyond returns.
One interesting development has been increasing interest in better ways
to measure ESG criteria. Of course, it is easy to identify tobacco companies
or firearms manufacturers, despite some companies’ efforts to diversify or
change names. It is more difficult to measure how companies are treating
their employees or local communities or how their products are positively
affecting the world, beyond company-provided metrics. Some firms that provide ESG metrics make extensive use of the existence of particular company
policies as a measure of ESG performance. The big data explosion has helped
in this area as well, providing more independent measures of ESG criteria.
What about the size of sustainable investing? The large amount of assets
sustainably invested speaks directly to “investing beyond returns” as a key trend
for investment management. Exhibit 5.12 shows the regional breakdown of
global sustainable assets (exclusionary screens, ESG, and impact investment
strategies) according to the Global Sustainable Investment Alliance (2016).
Total global sustainable assets were a substantial $23 trillion as of 2016.
Exhibit 5.12 shows that Europe leads the market in sustainable assets,
© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved. 

97

The Future of Investment Management
Exhibit 5.12. Global Sustainable Assets
Asia ex-Japan
0.20%
Australia/NZ
2.30%
Canada
4.80%

Japan
2.10%
Europe
52.60%

United States
38.10%

Source: Global Sustainable Investment Alliance (2016).

followed by the United States. The United States is the fastest-growing sustainable market, experiencing almost 24% average annual growth from 2012
through 2016. Consistent with these data, my group at BlackRock finds that
every European client and prospect wants to discuss what we are doing in this
area, and this topic arises in some of those meetings in the United States and
few meetings in Asia, at least so far.
As one more piece of evidence on increasing interest, Exhibit 5.13 shows
the Google Trends analysis of searches on “ESG investing” globally.
Here, too, we see a significant rise in interest, especially from about 2013
through today.
In a similar vein, my group at BlackRock examined the frequency of mentions of the word “diversity” in analyst reports on individual stocks. Analyst
reports are not the most obvious place to look for increased interest in ESG
investing, but even here, as shown in Exhibit 5.14, an increase in mentions
of diversity occurred, especially since the global financial crisis. Of course,
the term “diversity” is somewhat ambiguous, and Exhibit 5.14 may partly
demonstrate an increased interest in diversity of product markets or regional
suppliers in the period since the financial crisis, in addition to a diversity of
backgrounds among employees. As mentioned earlier in this chapter, text
analysis quickly confronts ambiguities.
98

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved.

5. Seven Trends in Investment Management
Exhibit 5.13. Trend in Global Searches on “ESG Investing”
Google Trend
120
100
80
60
40
20
0

Jun/07

Mar/10

Dec/12

Sep/15

Jan/17

Note: Peak search volume scaled to 100.

Exhibit 5.14.

Analyst Mentions of “Diversity” over Time

Percent
5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0

Nov/01

Aug/04

Apr/07

Jan/10

Oct/12

Jul/15

Apr/18

Note: Mentions per month scaled by number of analyst reports per month.
Source: BlackRock.

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved. 

99

The Future of Investment Management

As with any observed trend, we need to ask what caused it and why it
should continue. There are a variety of causes for increased sustainable investing, including the following:
•• Demographic shifts transferring more control of wealth to women
and millennials, two significant groups with high levels of interest in
sustainability
•• Increased understanding of the risks associated with climate change
•• Government regulations increasing company disclosures and, in some
cases, requiring that investment managers take sustainability into account
These causes look more likely to intensify than to abate over the next
5–10 years.

Trend 7. Fee Compression
Two of the previous trends—active to passive and smart beta—point toward
declining fees for investment management. Index fund fees are far below
active fees, and the disruptive innovation of smart beta/factor products was to
take standard components of active management, carve them out into transparent rule-based products, and sell them more cheaply than active products.
We already know from those trends that investment flows are moving from
higher-priced to lower-priced products.
It turns out that those effects do not fully explain the fee compression we
have experienced in investment management. Let’s explore this trend in more
detail.
Consider Exhibit 5.15, which shows the trend in expense ratios for active
and index mutual funds from 2000 through 2017.
We are focusing on US mutual fund data, as usual, because they are
clean, available, and public and they appear to be consistent with the broader
industry trend.
Exhibit 5.15 displays asset-weighted averages. They have been falling
for equity and bond funds and for active and index funds over this 18-year
period. Even within each category, fees have compressed.
To further see the relative importance of flows to lower-fee products and
product fees compressing, consider that, also according to the Investment
Company Institute (2018), the overall equity mutual fund asset-weighted
expense ratio was 0.99% in 2000 and 0.59% in 2017, whereas the overall bond
mutual fund asset-weighted expense ratio was 0.76% in 2000 and 0.48% in
2017. The overall asset-weighted expense ratio in each asset class is simply the
weighted average of the asset-weighted average active and index fund fees.
100

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved.

5. Seven Trends in Investment Management
Exhibit 5.15.
1.2

Expense Ratios of Actively Managed and Index Mutual Funds

1.06

Actively Managed Equity Mutual Funds

1.0
0.8

0.78

0.78

Actively Managed Bond Mutual Funds

0.55

0.6
0.4
0.2
0

0.27

Index Equity Mutual Funds

0.21

0.09

Index Bond Mutual Funds

0.07

00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17

Source: Investment Company Institute (2018).

For example,
Fee equity = w ⋅ Fee active equity + (1 − w ) ⋅ Feeindex equity .

(5.3)

Here, we ignore the smart beta/factor products because the data do not
break out that category. Doing so shouldn’t dramatically change the results
because smart beta/factor products have mainly been an equity phenomenon so far and flows to them have mainly occurred over the past few years.
Using Equation 5.3 and the average fee numbers already mentioned, we can
estimate the percentage of assets invested in active products (the term w in
Equation 5.3). Exhibit 5.16 shows the results.
Exhibit 5.16 agrees with the intuition that indexing has increased over
time and plays a bigger role in equity investing. If we saw this increase in
indexing percentage without any change in fees for active and indexing
Exhibit 5.16. Implied Active and Index Weights
% of Assets in Active

Equity
Bond

2000

2017

91.1%

72.5%

96.5

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved. 

85.4

101

The Future of Investment Management

products, it would lead to average equity fees dropping from 0.99% to 0.84%
and average bond fees dropping from 0.76% to 0.70%. Thus, the shift in assets
from active to index, by itself, explains less than half of the total drop in fees.
Why have asset-weighted expense ratios of active and index, equity and
bond mutual funds been dropping? There are at least three reasons. First,
assets have been flowing into the lowest-fee funds in each category. About
75% of the assets are invested in funds in the bottom 25% of fees, as of 2017.
Lower-cost funds attract most of the assets. Second, individual fund fees have
been falling. We can see this clearly in the world of index funds. For example, fees have steadily dropped for S&P 500 Index ETFs over the past few
years. The iShares S&P 500 ETF cost 0.09% in 2011, 0.07% in 2012, and
0.04% in 2016. The Vanguard S&P 500 ETF cost 0.05% in 2011 and 0.04%
since 2017. Retail investors can access broad market index ETFs for less than
5 bps, and institutional investors pay even less. The third reason that fees are
compressing within category is that new funds launch with lower fees. For
example, my group at BlackRock recently launched a series of equity mutual
funds with below-average fees for active equity funds.
Can fee compression continue? Assets can still flow from active to index
and smart beta/factor products, lowering average fees. As for individual product fees, on the index fund side there is not much more room to drop. The
fees for broad and liquid indexes, such as the S&P 500, are already below
5 bps. These funds incur costs to run, including portfolio management, legal,
and distribution expenses. The institutions offering these funds also assume
some risk of operating errors, the cost of which scales with asset size. We
shouldn’t expect index fees to drop to zero, and hence, they probably have little additional room to fall. That said, as I am completing this book in August
2018, Fidelity Investments just announced two broad equity index funds with
zero fees.
What about active management fees? Let’s focus on pure alpha fees
because smart beta/factor funds are quickly lowering fees for those strategies.
My group at BlackRock thinks about fees as a fraction of alpha delivered. If
we deliver a certain amount of alpha, how much goes to the investor (the asset
owner) and how much goes to us? This breakdown is explicit for hedge funds,
which typically charge a 2% base fee plus 20% of the positive alpha delivered.
To be clear, they receive 20% of the alpha delivered if it is positive. Negative
delivered alpha does not reduce their fee. Between the 2% base fee and the
incentive fee paid only for positive delivered alpha, hedge funds keep more
than 20% of the alpha they deliver.
We can think about fixed fees in the same way, representing a fraction
of the expected alpha. The fraction should fall somewhere between 20% and
102

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved.

5. Seven Trends in Investment Management

35%, with higher fractions going to funds with higher information ratios.
Such funds deliver more consistent alpha, and investors likely have more
confidence that they have identified a skillful manager. More capacityconstrained products and niche products also tend to demand high-fractional
shares.
As a general comment, it is expensive to produce consistent pure alpha
return streams—between the costs of the required data and the costs of the
required talented individuals, who are often highly sought out by investment
management competitors and, for big data and machine learning experts,
technology firms.
What does the 20%–35% sharing range tell us about mutual fund fees,
which are a fixed percentage of assets? We already saw that the average
mutual fund subtracted alpha, so this analysis will not work when applied
to aggregate delivered alpha. Instead, consider the following “hand-waving”
analysis. Let’s assume that investors choose active funds they believe will
deliver top-quartile performance. (If you think we should focus on the top
15th percentile or 30th percentile, that’s beyond the precision of this analysis.)
Let’s look at average mutual fund fees and compare them with the 20%–35%
sharing range.
I estimate top-quartile performance as follows. As discussed in Chapter 4,
a top-quartile mutual fund information ratio before fees is about 0.5.
If we multiply that by the typical active risk level, we can estimate a topquartile active return. To estimate typical active risk levels for mutual funds,
BlackRock used the Morningstar database of mutual fund returns over the
period from October 1997 through September 2017 and divided those data
into four five-year periods to better understand how active risk varies over
time. We calculated the median realized active risk for large-cap US equity
funds and for US broad fixed-income funds. The median US large-cap equity
mutual fund active risk varied from a high of 7.75% in the earliest period to
a low of 3.18% in the most recent period. For the broad US fixed-income
mutual funds, the median active risk varied from a high of 2.81% during
the five-year period containing the global financial crisis (October 2007–
September 2012) to a low of 0.85% during the previous period (October
2002–September 2007). Averaging the median active risk numbers over these
four periods, we found 4.79% active risk for US large-cap funds and 1.45% for
broad US fixed-income funds.
Based on the averages over those four periods, we expect a top-quartile
US active equity manager to deliver about 2.4% active return before fees.
Our sharing range implies that fees should range between about 84 bps and

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved. 

103

The Future of Investment Management

48 bps. The average expense ratio is currently 78 bps—near the top of the
range—so there may be a little more room for equity fund fees to fall.
For bond mutual funds, we expect a top-quartile manager to deliver
about 0.72% active return before fees.56 The same sharing range implies that
fees should range between 25 bps and 14 bps. Because the average expense
ratio is currently 55 bps, there appears to be more room for bond fund fees to
fall, which will be challenging because the costs of managing an active bond
fund aren’t much different from the costs of managing an active equity fund.
I first wrote about this phenomenon in “Bond Managers Need to Take More
Risk” in 1998, where I pointed out the mismatch between active risk and fees
for bond funds. It’s still an issue in 2018.
Investment management fees have compressed over the past two decades,
and that trend may well continue. Furthermore, incentive fees may become
more prevalent. They represent fees as a percentage of alpha delivered, which
is the natural way to think about fees. They also align the incentives of the
manager with the investor, though not perfectly, as discussed in Kahn,
Scanlan, and Siegel (2006).

Bibliography
Barras, Laurent, Olivier Scaillet, and Russ Wermers. 2010. “False Discoveries
in Mutual Fund Performance: Measuring Luck in Estimated Alphas.” Journal
of Finance 65 (1): 179–216.
Benz, Christine. 2008. “Bogle on a Knock against Indexing.” Morningstar
video interview (23 September). www.morningstar.com/cover/VideoCenter.
aspx?id=255347.
Burning Glass, IBM, and the Business-Higher Education Forum. 2017. “The
Quant Crunch: How the Demand for Data Science Skills Is Disrupting the
Job Market.” https://www.burning-glass.com/wp-content/uploads/The_
Quant_Crunch.pdf.
Butler, Declan. 2013. “When Google Got Flu Wrong.” Nature 494: 155–6.
Carhart, Mark M. 1997. “On Persistence in Mutual Fund Performance.”
Journal of Finance 52 (1): 57–82.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French. 1992. “The Cross-Section of
Expected Stock Returns.” Journal of Finance, 47 (2): 427–65.
Top-quartile information ratios for fixed income may be a bit higher because of some structural issues around the construction of fixed-income indexes that provide opportunities to
outperform them.
56

104

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved.

5. Seven Trends in Investment Management

———. French. 2010. “Luck versus Skill in the Cross Section of Mutual
Fund Returns.” Journal of Finance, 65 (5): 1915–47.
French, Kenneth R. 2008. “The Cost of Active Investing.” Journal of Finance
63 (4): 1537–73.
Ginsberg, Jeremy, Matthew H. Mohebbi, Rajan S. Patel, Lynnette Brammer,
Mark S. Smolinski, and Larry Brilliant. 2009. “Detecting Influenza
Epidemics Using Search Engine Query Data.” Science 457: 1012–14.
Global Sustainable Investment Alliance. 2016. “Global Sustainable
Investment Review.” www.gsi-alliance.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/03/
GSIR_Review2016.F.pdf.
Grinold, Richard C., and Ronald N. Kahn. 2000. Active Portfolio Management,
2nd ed. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Grossman, Sanford J., and Joseph E. Stiglitz. 1980. “On the Impossibility
of Informationally Efficient Markets.” American Economic Review 70 (3):
393–408.
Hamilton, Sally, Hoje Jo, and Meir Statman. 1993. “Doing Well by Doing
Good? The Investment Performance of Socially Responsible Mutual Funds.”
Financial Analysts Journal (November/December): 62–66.
Huij, Joop, and Simon Lansdorp. 2012. “Mutual Fund Performance
Persistence, Market Efficiency, and Breadth.” Working paper (25 October).
Investment Company Institute. 2018. “Investment Company Fact Book:
2018.” www.ici.org/pdf/2018_factbook.pdf.
Kahn, Ronald N. 1998. “Bond Managers Need to Take More Risk.” Journal
of Portfolio Management (Spring): 70–76.
Kahn, Ronald N., Claes Lekander, and Tom Leimkuhler. 1997. “Just Say
No? The Investment Implications of Tobacco Divestiture.” Journal of Investing
(Winter): 62–70.
Kahn, Ronald N., and Michael Lemmon. 2015. “Smart Beta: The Owner’s
Manual.” Journal of Portfolio Management (Winter): 76–83.
Kahn, Ronald N., and Michael Lemmon. 2016. “The Asset Manager’s
Dilemma: How Smart Beta Is Disrupting the Investment Management
Industry.” Financial Analysts Journal 72 (1): 15–20.

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved. 

105

The Future of Investment Management

Kahn, Ronald N., and Andrew Rudd. 1995. “Does Historical Performance
Predict Future Performance?” Financial Analysts Journal (November/
December): 43–52.
Kahn, Ronald N., Matthew H. Scanlan, and Laurence B. Siegel. 2006. “Five
Myths about Fees.” Journal of Portfolio Management (Spring): 56–64.
Kaplan, Steve, and Antoinette Schoar. 2005. “Private Equity Performance:
Returns, Persistence, and Capital Flows.” Journal of Finance 60 (4):1791–823.
McLean, R. David, and Jeffrey Pontiff. 2016. “Does Academic Research
Destroy Stock Return Predictability?” Journal of Finance 71 (1): 5–32.
Ross, Stephen A. 1976. “The Arbitrage Theory of Capital Asset Pricing.”
Journal of Economic Theory 13 (3): 341–60.
Rudd, Andrew. 1979. “Divestment of South African Equities: How Risky?”
Journal of Portfolio Management 5 (3): 5–10.
———. 1981. “Social Responsibility and Portfolio Performance.” California
Management Review (Summer): 55–61.
Thompson, Jennifer. 2017. “Smart Beta Funds Pass $1tn in Assets.” Financial
Times (27 December).
“Trends and Outlook for Smart Beta.” 2017. FTSE Russell Insights (June).
Van Gelderen, Eduard, and Joop Huij. 2014. “Academic Knowledge
Dissemination in the Mutual Fund Industry: Can Mutual Funds Successfully
Adopt Factor Investing Strategies?” Journal of Portfolio Management
(Summer): 157–67.

106

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved.

6. The Future of Investment Management
The future is no longer what it used to be.
—Friedrich Hollander

We have now studied the modern history of investment management—
the origins of the field and the development of its key ideas. I have provided
several important insights into active management, including the arithmetic
of active management and the fundamental law of active management. And
I have discussed seven trends that will help predict the future of investment
management, at least over the next 5–10 years.
In the 1960s, investment management was active management.
Investment management is now evolving into three branches:
•• Indexing
•• Smart beta/factor investing
•• Pure alpha investing
The indexing branch is already clear and distinct, even though it may
continue to evolve. The smart beta/factor investing branch has developed
more recently, and I expect it to grow. The pure alpha branch of investment
management is less well defined today and has evolved as the part of active
management complementary to smart beta/factor investing.
These three branches will each offer two styles of products: those that
focus exclusively on returns and those that also include goals beyond returns.
I discuss each of these branches and styles in turn, considering the underlying investment case, the requirements for investment and business success,
and what could go wrong. Let’s start with indexing.

Index Funds
Index funds have existed for almost 50 years now, and they are more popular
than ever. As discussed in Chapter 5, money has been steadily flowing from
active to index funds over the past decade. Even if that trend eases, indexing is already a significant, established branch of investing. Perhaps the most
certain statement we can make about the future of investment management is
that indexing will be a significant part of it.
The investment case for indexing is compelling. Both the CAPM and the
EMH argue for index funds. Even if there are consistently successful active
managers, Sharpe’s arithmetic of active management states that the average
© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved. 

107

The Future of Investment Management

active manager will underperform, and the empirical evidence all supports
that statement. Furthermore, indexing is the one area of investment management that can consistently deliver on its promises. The large S&P 500 Index
funds consistently deliver the S&P 500 return minus a very small management fee day after day, year after year.
My former colleague Barton Waring and his co-author, Laurence Siegel,
said in their 2003 Journal of Portfolio Management article that there are two
requirements for an investor to choose active management:
•• The investor must believe superior active managers exist.
•• The investor must have the skill to identify the active managers who will
deliver positive active returns in the future.
If investors follow this thoughtful advice, many will choose indexing. For
most institutional investors and for increasing numbers of retail investors, the
question is no longer whether to invest in index funds but, rather, how much
to allocate to index funds relative to active funds.
Index funds have also benefited from strong investor interest in exchangetraded funds. The majority of ETFs are index funds, though not necessarily
broad market index funds as envisioned in the academic arguments in favor
of indexing. Exchange-traded funds offer some distinct advantages over other
fund structures, including continuous pricing and liquidity—investors can
trade them throughout the day—and tax efficiency. The continuing interest in
ETFs also supports the case that indexing will be a significant component of
investment management going forward.
Successful indexing is all about delivering index exposure as reliably and
cheaply as possible. The demands for closely and reliably tracking indexes
require strong financial engineering skills and technology. The ability to
offer exposures cheaply requires scale. The most successful indexing firms are
incredibly large in terms of assets under management, and we expect index
fund management to consolidate for scale. That has largely already happened.
These firms offer very low fee index funds.
Many things could go wrong in investment management, but nothing
would systemically threaten indexing as an important category. An extended
period of low or negative returns could shift some assets out of indexing
and into active management, but the arguments in favor of indexing are too
strong for that situation to eliminate indexing as an investment management
category. A particular fund offered by a particular manager might suffer a
crippling operating error, but that would threaten only that fund and that
manager. Indexing does not seem to face systemic risks.
108

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved.

6. The Future of Investment Management

Smart Beta/Factor Funds
Smart beta/factor products are recent developments in investment management. As I discussed, the underlying investment ideas are anything but recent
developments; most have been around for decades, if not centuries. The packaging of these ideas into products is the big innovation.
The investment case for smart beta/factor products is strong, although not
as strong as the case for indexing. Whereas the arithmetic of active management essentially guarantees that broad market index funds will be consistent
above-median performers, smart beta/factor funds might be top-quartile performers, on average, but could deliver bottom-quartile performance in certain
years.
Because these products resemble index funds in their transparency, rulebased approach to implementation, and low cost, they benefit to some extent
from investor interest in index funds. Similarly, many smart beta products are
ETFs and thus benefit from the general investor interest in those vehicles.
The requirements for investment and business success in smart beta/factor
products closely resemble the requirements for success in indexing. Once
again, it is all about delivering exposure to factors as reliably and cheaply as
possible, with the associated advantages to scale. This field is more recent
than indexing, and many firms offer these products. I expect consolidation
over time, such that a small number of firms will manage most of the smart
beta/factor assets. Smart beta/factor fees are lower than active management
fees, and they have been falling.
This is a new area of investment management, and at least three things
could go wrong that would systemically threaten the category. First, smart
beta/factor products could go through an extended period of underperformance. As previously noted, there is no guarantee that these factors will
outperform every year. Even multi-factor products that benefit from the
diversification across factors cannot guarantee that they will consistently
outperform.
In traditional active management and in pure alpha management, performance depends on the manager. If a manager underperforms over an
extended period, investors will fire her. That could also cause those investors to question active management generally, but if they invest across several
active managers, they will probably observe some that are succeeding.
Smart beta/factor products are different in that managers are delivering exposures to factors that investors want. Do you fire the manager if the
smart beta product underperforms? Would you fire the index fund manager
if the index underperforms? Extended underperformance of a given smart
beta category could cause investors to question the category more than the
© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved. 

109

The Future of Investment Management

manager. Thus, smart beta underperformance may systemically threaten
this entire branch of investment management in a way that active manager
underperformance doesn’t threaten active management. That said, given
the diversity of smart beta factors and their performance across regions, it is
unlikely that most or all smart beta/factor products would underperform in
the same period.
The second thing that could go wrong with smart beta/factor investing
is somewhat related to the first. Both concern underperformance. This second potential landmine, however, is significant short-term underperformance
that could arise after the buildup of many large and correlated smart beta/
factor funds. Sudden and substantial outflows from those funds, possibly
in response to events unrelated to smart beta/factors, could generate sizable
short-term underperformance. This happened to quantitative equity strategies, particularly a short-term trading strategy called statistical arbitrage but
also what we now call smart beta factors—value, momentum, small size, and
quality—in early August 2007. Huge amounts of money had flowed into
these funds in the prior few years. Some investors treated these funds almost
like money market funds—highly liquid with appealing information ratios.
When the subprime mortgage crisis triggered margin calls at firms with
illiquid subprime mortgage holdings, several of those firms simultaneously
started selling their more liquid quantitative equity funds to raise cash. Too
many funds exiting at the same time led to extreme negative returns in the
seemingly diversified equity funds, and several highly leveraged quantitative
equity hedge funds folded. About 75% of the assets invested in quantitative
equity funds left over the following two to three years. A sudden and significant drawdown, correlated across many smart beta/factor products, could also
systemically threaten this emerging branch of investment management.
The third thing that could go wrong concerns the still-developing investor understanding of smart beta/factor investing. In particular, investors may
not understand how performance can significantly vary from one product to
the next. In the world of index funds, investors do understand that the performance of an S&P 500 Index fund will differ from the performance of a
Russell 1000 Index fund, and they even understand the most likely source of
that difference: the presence of some smaller stocks in the Russell 1000.
Investors do not have that level of understanding of smart beta/factor
funds. Two funds can both invest in “value” or “low volatility,” but those
characteristics are not precisely defined. Different funds will use different
definitions, and sometimes those different definitions will lead to significantly differing performance. In most of those cases, both choices are reasonable ex ante; they just vary in performance ex post. Investor experience with
110

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved.

6. The Future of Investment Management

divergent performance could sour them on smart beta/factor products as
a category.

Pure Alpha Funds
The third branch of investment management consists of the pure alpha funds.
I believe that as smart beta/factor funds establish themselves and offer components of traditional active management cheaply, active managers will need
to focus on delivering the part of active returns that investors can’t access
through smart beta/factor funds.
Pure alpha investing faces the most difficult investment case. We expect
most pure alpha products to underperform on the basis of the arithmetic of
active management. That said, there are reasons to believe that some pure
alpha managers can succeed, based on informational inefficiencies, behavioral
anomalies, investor constraints, and some opportunistic trades. The top pure
alpha investors should be able to deliver consistent performance.
In this case, the requirements for success are very different from what we
saw for indexing and smart beta/factor investing. Pure alpha investing is not
about delivering exposures cheaply. Much of it is about finding publicly available information the market doesn’t yet understand. Broad and persistent factors are relatively easy to find—exactly because they are broad and persistent.
Pure alpha ideas are narrower and more transient. That transience means
that successful pure alpha investing requires constant innovation, hence
the strong research capabilities able to drive that innovation. Successful
pure alpha investors must constantly replace old ideas that the market now
understands with fresh ideas. The new world of big data and machine learning is providing great opportunities for innovation. Quantitative pure alpha
investors—especially those who have the required skills—are already exploiting these opportunities. Other pure alpha investors will need to upgrade their
skills in this technical area. Pure alpha investing is too difficult for any investor to ignore any opportunities.
For pure alpha investors, the appeal of long–short investing will be especially compelling. I have shown that the long-only constraint has a significant
impact on portfolio efficiency and that this impact increases with active risk.
Just as pure alpha investors can’t afford to ignore big data and machine learning, they also can’t afford to ignore the impact of the long-only constraint. I
expect that successful pure alpha managers will offer long–short or partial
short products in the interest of efficiency. More generally, I expect to see
successful pure alpha managers in the private equity and alternative spaces—
areas that even today demonstrate relatively convincing evidence of successful
active management, as mentioned in Chapter 5.
© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved. 

111

The Future of Investment Management

Pure alpha investing is distinctly not a scale business: It is capacity constrained. It is not an area where I expect consolidation, at least at the fund
level. Instead, the most successful pure alpha investment firms will be
research-driven boutiques, possibly including some boutiques within larger
asset management firms.
Successful pure alpha investing is expensive because of the requirement of
constant innovation and its associated demand for highly skilled professionals. Consistent pure alpha performance is quite valuable to investors. In spite
of current pressures, I do not expect fees to fall much, especially for the most
successful products. Many of these funds use incentive fees that depend on
delivered performance and generally—though not completely—align managers and investors.57
Although plenty can go wrong with individual pure alpha products, I
expect products to be uncorrelated on average. Poor performance will threaten
individual funds without also threatening the entire pure active branch of
investment management. More than 50 years after the development of the
CAPM, index funds have now made significant inroads against active management. But doing so took 50 years, and most assets are still actively managed.

Investing Beyond Returns
As I have discussed, the trend toward investing beyond returns—including ESG factors—shows no sign of abating. Non-investment goals can live
side-by-side with investment goals. Grouping those factors under the general
heading of sustainability, investors will have their choice of sustainable index
funds, sustainable smart beta/factor funds, and sustainable pure alpha funds,
along with their standard counterparts. These funds already exist. I expect
more and more such offerings, including newer funds based on increasingly
available independent data that inform our views of companies along many
sustainability dimensions.
In these funds, the investment case is built mainly on investor utility
beyond returns, although in some instances investors believe these ideas predict long-run returns or help avoid long-run risk. Some of these products—
such as those that simply exclude tobacco stocks—are easy to implement, and
thus all investment firms should be able to offer products in this area.
To be fair, many investors find these simpler products based on various exclusions to be the most transparent and hence the most compelling.
The more sophisticated products—those where portfolio weights depend on
a continuous scale of sustainability along multiple dimensions and where
57

Kahn, Scanlan, and Siegel (2006).

112

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved.

6. The Future of Investment Management

independently gathered data inform those sustainability metrics—will require
a dedicated research staff devoted to the area. Stated another way: All investment firms can offer products in this area, but only the more sophisticated
and research-driven firms can offer state-of-the-art sustainability products.
What could go wrong in the world of investing beyond returns? First,
the returns to these products could significantly lag behind their non-sustainability counterparts. Many people have studied this question over time.
Meir Statman and Denys Glushkov (2016) examined the performance of US
socially responsible mutual funds by defining two distinct new factors, similar to the factors previously proposed by Fama, French, and Carhart:
•• TMB (top minus bottom) is a factor that is long stocks in the top third
along various socially responsible criteria and short stocks in the bottom
third along the same dimensions.
•• AMS (accepted minus shunned) is a factor that is long stocks commonly
accepted by socially responsible investors and short stocks commonly
shunned, including alcohol, tobacco, gaming, firearms, military, and
nuclear power stocks.
In short, they found positive returns associated with the TMB factor and
negative returns associated with the AMS factor. Every socially responsible
fund will have its own exposures to these two factors, but typically they have
positive exposures to both. The end result is fairly small and often not statistically significant differences in performance.
In the end, investors like these funds because they align with their beliefs.
It would take significant underperformance to deter them. I do not see evidence of a level of underperformance that would threaten this entire approach
to investing.
A second thing that could go wrong is mainly a challenge for providers of
these funds. Once we move beyond return and risk, views on environmental,
social, and governance factors vary widely. I remember being surprised when
a church pension plan asked us to exclude Disney—which seemed to me a
very wholesome, family-oriented company. The problem was Disney’s policy
of providing domestic partner benefits for employees, which violated church
tenets. I don’t bring up this example in any way to question this pension plan’s
beliefs or sincerity. Rather, it is just one of many examples I have experienced
of different investors having specific “beyond returns” views on certain companies. The challenge for investment managers is that the pool of clients—
and their viewpoints or beliefs—may be quite disparate. There may not be
any one-size-fits-all fund possibilities or even anything close to that. Given
the assets in these investments already and the availability of technology to
© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved. 

113

The Future of Investment Management

facilitate managing large numbers of separate accounts, this problem does not
seem to be insurmountable.
A third thing that could go wrong is a loss of faith in the metrics used
to measure sustainability. Garvey, Kazdin, LaFond, Nash, and Safa (2017)
showed that, contrary to expectations, high ESG ratings predict, rather than
prevent, controversies. The methodologies used to measure ESG ratings are
company reported and are often based on companies having particular ESGrelated policies. As it turns out, companies often develop such policies in
response to circumstances and controversies that predict future controversies.
This is not a criticism of sustainable investing but, rather, evidence of the need
for better metrics.

Fees
I have already discussed the trend in fee compression and argued that it has
little further room to go for index funds and more room to go for active funds,
especially bond funds. For bond funds, the issue may be less about fees and
more about the mismatch between fees and active risk.
Concerning fees for pure alpha, as we have noted, pure alpha is expensive to produce, valuable for investors, and capacity constrained. Therefore,
in spite of fee pressures on active managers, including pure alpha managers,
we expect fees on pure alpha products to remain high, especially for the most
successful pure alpha managers. We also expect these products to increasingly
offer incentive fees. This is the natural way to think about fees—as a fraction
of pure alpha delivered—and it generally aligns manager and investor incentives. Investors pay high fees when performance is strong.
Overall, looking forward, we expect low fixed fees and increasing use of
incentive fees in investment management.

Conclusion
Over the course of this book, I have traced investment management from
its early origins through a set of intellectual developments that have strongly
influenced the field today and its likely future development.
Indexing is a significant component of investment management today,
and it will remain a significant component. We can trace indexing back to the
CAPM and the EMH of the 1960s and to the arithmetic of active management in 1991.
Smart beta/factor investing goes back, in part, to Stephen Ross and arbitrage pricing theory in 1976, as well as to a set of very old investment ideas.
We saw evidence of value investing in the Dutch investment trusts of the late
114

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved.

6. The Future of Investment Management

1700s. The ideas may go back even further, but the trail of detailed evidence
ends there.
Pure alpha investing builds on the informational inefficiency argument
of Grossman and Stiglitz, although it was clearly happening long before they
analyzed it. The story of the Rothschilds using carrier pigeons to learn the
outcome of the Battle of Waterloo in advance of their competitors and then
successfully trading on that knowledge (even if not exactly true)58 testifies to
the long-understood value of finding out material information before others.
Investing beyond returns—sustainable investing, socially responsible
investing, ESG investing—is in some ways a slight counterpoint to investment management’s increasingly systematic focus on return and risk. It recognizes that utility functions are more complicated and many investors have
goals beyond just high returns and low risk. It is not a refutation of the great
advances brought by Markowitz but, rather, an acknowledgement that human
nature, and thus investment management, is too complicated to reduce to
two variables. As we have seen, however, investment management can handle
many return factors systematically. It can even handle non-return factors systematically, and there are already funds that combine return and non-return
factors transparently, based on models. We have yet to see a widely accepted
approach to optimizing a portfolio for multiple objectives, but I expect to see
such a development in the next few years.
Investment management is an inherently uncertain activity. Risk—the
distribution of potential outcomes—is unavoidable. But the approach to this
uncertain activity is increasingly systematic. Indexing and smart beta/factor
investing are both very systematic. Pure alpha investing has become increasingly systematic as the understanding has grown for the magnitude of the
challenge. Sustainable investing is often quite systematic.
Over the course of its recorded history, from the late 1700s in the
Netherlands to a global industry today, investment management has become
increasingly systematic. Over that same period but especially since the development of indexing, investment management has become more specialized,
offering transparency and low costs where possible. Both of these high-level
trends will continue.

Bibliography
Garvey, Gerald T., Joshua Kazdin, Ryan LaFond, Joanna Nash, and
Hussein Safa. 2017. “A Pitfall in Ethical Investing: ESG Disclosures Reflect
Vulnerabilities, Not Virtues.” Journal of Investment Management 15 (2): 51–64.
58

John Kay (2013).

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved. 

115

The Future of Investment Management

Kahn, Ronald N., Matthew H. Scanlan, and Laurence B. Siegel. 2006. “Five
Myths about Fees.” Journal of Portfolio Management 32 (3): 56–64.
Kay, John. 2013. “Enduring Lessons from the Legend of Rothschild’s Carrier
Pigeon.” Financial Times (28 May).
Statman, Meir, and Denys Glushkov. 2016. “Classifying and Measuring
the Performance of Socially Responsible Mutual Funds.” Journal of Portfolio
Management (Winter): 1–12.
Waring, Barton, and Laurence B. Siegel. 2003. “The Dimensions of Active
Management.” Journal of Portfolio Management 29 (3): 35–51.

116

© 2018 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved.

The CFA Institute
Research Foundation
Board of Trustees
2018–2019
Chair
Ted Aronson, CFA
AJO
Jeffery V. Bailey, CFA*
Tonka Bay, MN
Bill Fung, PhD
Aventura, FL

Joanne Hill
CBOE Vest Financial

Aaron Low, CFA
Lumen Advisors

George R. Hoguet, CFA
Chesham Investments,
LLC

Diane Nordin, CFA
Concord, MA

Robert Jenkins, FSIP
London Business School
Joachim Klement, CFA
Fidante Partners

Diane Garnick
TIAA
JT Grier, CFA*
Virginia Retirement
System

Vikram Kuriyan, PhD, CFA
GWA and Indian School
of Business

Mauro Miranda, CFA
CFA Society Brazil
Sophie Palmer, CFA
Jarislowsky Fraser
Paul Smith, CFA
CFA Institute

*Emeritus

Officers and Directors
Executive Director
Bud Haslett, CFA
CFA Institute

Secretary
Jessica Critzer
CFA Institute

Gary P. Brinson Director of Research
Laurence B. Siegel
Blue Moon Communications

Treasurer
Kim Maynard
CFA Institute

Research Foundation Review Board
William J. Bernstein
Efficient Frontier
Advisors
Elroy Dimson
London Business School
Stephen Figlewski
New York University
William N. Goetzmann
Yale School of
Management
Elizabeth R. Hilpman
Barlow Partners, Inc.

Paul D. Kaplan, CFA
Morningstar, Inc.
Robert E. Kiernan III
Advanced Portfolio
Management

Krishna Ramaswamy
University of
Pennsylvania
Andrew Rudd
Advisor Software, Inc.

Andrew W. Lo
Massachusetts Institute
of Technology

Stephen Sexauer
Allianz Global Investors
Solutions

Alan Marcus
Boston College

Lee R. Thomas
Pacific Investment
Management Company

Paul O’Connell
FDO Partners

Named Endowments
The CFA Institute Research Foundation acknowledges with sincere gratitude the
generous contributions of the Named Endowment participants listed below.
Gifts of at least US$100,000 qualify donors for membership in the Named Endowment category, which recognizes in perpetuity the commitment toward unbiased,
practitioner-oriented, relevant research that these firms and individuals have expressed through their generous support of the CFA Institute Research Foundation.
Ameritech
Anonymous
Robert D. Arnott
Theodore R. Aronson, CFA
Asahi Mutual Life Insurance Company
Batterymarch Financial
Management
Boston Company
Boston Partners Asset Management,
L.P.
Gary P. Brinson, CFA
Brinson Partners, Inc.
Capital Group International, Inc.
Concord Capital Management
Dai-Ichi Life Insurance Company
Daiwa Securities
Mr. and Mrs. Jeffrey Diermeier
Gifford Fong Associates
Investment Counsel Association
of America, Inc.
Jacobs Levy Equity Management
John A. Gunn, CFA
John B. Neff, CFA
Jon L. Hagler Foundation
Long-Term Credit Bank of Japan, Ltd.
Lynch, Jones & Ryan, LLC
Meiji Mutual Life Insurance
Company

Miller Anderson & Sherrerd, LLP
Nikko Securities Co., Ltd.
Nippon Life Insurance Company of
Japan
Nomura Securities Co., Ltd.
Payden & Rygel
Provident National Bank
Frank K. Reilly, CFA
Salomon Brothers
Sassoon Holdings Pte. Ltd.
Scudder Stevens & Clark
Security Analysts Association
of Japan
Shaw Data Securities, Inc.
Sit Investment Associates, Inc.
Standish, Ayer & Wood, Inc.
State Farm Insurance Company
Sumitomo Life America, Inc.
T. Rowe Price Associates, Inc.
Templeton Investment Counsel Inc.
Frank Trainer, CFA
Travelers Insurance Co.
USF&G Companies
Yamaichi Securities Co., Ltd.

Senior Research Fellows
Financial Services Analyst Association
For more on upcoming Research Foundation
publications and webcasts, please visit
www.cfainstitute.org/learning/foundation.
Research Foundation monographs
are online at www.cfapubs.org.

RESEARCH FOUNDATION
CONTRIBUTION FORM

✓Yes, I want the Research Foundation to continue to fund innovative
research that advances the investment management profession. Please
accept my tax-deductible contribution at the following level:
Thought Leadership Circle..................... US$1,000,000 or more
Named Endowment....................... US$100,000 to US$999,999
Research Fellow............................... US$10,000 to US$99,999
Contributing Donor. . ............................US$1,000 to US$9,999
Friend........................................................... Up to US$999
I would like to donate US$______________________.

My check is enclosed (payable to the CFA Institute Research Foundation).
I would like to donate appreciated securities (send me information).
Please charge my donation to my credit card.
VISA
MC
Amex
Diners

Card Number

—— /——

_______________________________

Expiration Date

Name on card    P L E A S E   P R I N T

Corporate Card
Personal Card

__________________________________
Signature

This is a pledge. Please bill me for my donation of US$______________
I would like recognition of my donation to be:
Individual donation
Corporate donation
Different individual

____________________________________________________
PLEASE PRINT NAME OR COMPANY NAME AS YOU WOULD LIKE IT TO APPEAR

PLEASE PRINT

Mr.

Last Name (Family Name)

Mrs.

Ms.

  MEMBER NUMBER_______________________________
First (Given Name)

Middle Initial

Title
Address
City

State/Province

Country ZIP/Postal Code

Please mail this completed form with your contribution to:
The CFA Institute Research Foundation • P.O. Box 2082
Charlottesville, VA 22902-2082 USA
For more on the CFA Institute Research Foundation, please visit
www.cfainstitute.org/learning/foundation/Pages/index.aspx.

This is a fascinating glimpse into the
future of finance by one of the principal
architects of current finance and should
be required reading for every investment
professional.
— Andrew Lo Charles E. and Susan T. Harris
Professor, MIT Sloan School of Management
As theorist, Ron Kahn married the principle
of portfolio diversification to a theory of
active management. And as a practitioner,
he personally traveled the road from
“beta grazers” to “alpha hunters”—an ideal
background for a thoughtful treatise on
The Future of Investment Management.
— Martin L. Leibowitz Vice Chairman,
Morgan Stanley Research
“It’s tough to make predictions, especially
about the future.” –Yogi Berra
Dr. Kahn has the talent, training,
and experience to give the reader a
comprehensive look into the future of
the investment management industry.
Anyone close to the industry knows it
has undergone a dramatic evolution from
the introduction of index funds in the
1970s to the arrival of AI and fintech in the
2010s. But where is this change leading?
Read Dr. Kahn’s book for the likely answer.
— John O’Brien Professor Emeritus, Haas
School of Business, UC Berkeley
Co-founder, Haas School’s Master of
Financial Engineering Program

Ron Kahn offers an intriguing and compelling
view into the future of investment
management, which he underpins with a
perceptive recounting of its intellectual
history along with essential insights from his
groundbreaking work on active management.
Whether you work in the field or simply invest,
this book will certainly enrich you intellectually
and perhaps in other ways as well.
— Mark Kritzman, CFA CEO, Windham Capital
Management
Senior Lecturer, MIT Sloan School of
Management
All investors will benefit from this glorious
presentation of the past, present, and future of
investment management—written with deep
insights and practical guidance from a noted
authority in the field of systematic investing.
— Andrew Ang Head of Factor Investing
Strategies, BlackRock
Kahn, a co-author of the book on active
portfolio management, takes the long
and wide view of the field, weaving prehistory, recent trends, and the future
into one coherent story, with themes of
diversification and risk, information, and
technology. He gives us a glimpse of where
we are headed, and it includes significant
roles for big data and machine learning.
— Stephen Boyd Samsung Professor of
Electrical Engineering, Stanford University
Artificial Intelligence Lab, BlackRock

ISBN 978-1-944960-56-8

Available online at www.cfainstitute.org

9 781944 960568

